Humans, at least in this part of the
world, were wrenched into a way of
living that was so different from how
the hunter-gatherer ancestors lived that
the organism had to adapt very strongly.
Maybe the degree of that wrenching
process moving into the Bronze Age was
qualitatively greater than the degree of
the wrenching process that happened
[music] from the initial transition to
growing plants, which is surprising cuz
our cartoon picture is that the big
transition [music] is farming. But the
genetic data, the biological readout, is
saying our genome is reacting much more
strongly to these events that happened
5,000 years ago.
>> I am back with David Reich, who is a
professor of ancient DNA at Harvard. How
do you describe what it is that you you
study?
>> I'm a geneticist and I work on human
history and how people relate ancient
people relate to each other and people
living today.
>> Great. Um and so we did an interview
was it 2 years ago at this point, which
um ended up being one of the most
popular interviews I've ever done. I
think people just found really
compelling that there's so much about
human history we don't know and are just
learning about now as a result of the
kinds of techniques that your lab is
using. And um you have a new preprint
that
that's very exciting and I wanted to
talk to you about it. Um so let's begin.
What can you can you tell give me a
little bit of context on what we're
talking about today?
>> Well, well the dream was that when this
field started, this ancient DNA field
started,
more than 16 or 17 years ago, that we
were going to learn a lot about biology,
learn about how people's biology changed
over time by getting DNA out of ancient
human remains and tracking changes over
time. And that dream has really not been
realized since the beginning of this
field. So while the field's been a big
success with regard to learning about
human history, it's resulted in
surprising findings about human
migrations, people not being descended
from the people who lived in the same
place hundreds or thousands or tens of
thousands of years before, and mixture
being common in human history, sex
biased processes being common in human
history, and things that were not
expected from archaeology. And so, the
field's been a big success from that
perspective. But, what's not been
successful is learning about uh biology
and biological change. And one big
reason for that has been that the sample
sizes have been too small. So, when you
have a single person's DNA, it provides
a
uh tremendous amount of information
about history. And that's because when
you look at one person's DNA, it's not a
single person, it's many people. It's
your two parents, it's your four
grandparents, it's your eight
great-grandparents, and 16
great-great-grandparents, and so on.
And going back in time thousands, tens
of thousands, even hundreds of thousands
of ancestors going back in time
contributed to people today.
So, when you look at the DNA of a single
person's genome or a Neanderthal genome,
you have effectively tens of thousands
of ancestors all represented in your
data. And you can you can position that
individual exquisitely with respect to
other people from whom you have data.
But, when you are interested in how a
particular genetic variant that affects
something like your skin pigmentation or
affects your ability to digest cow's
milk into adulthood or affects a
behavioral trait, when you want to see
how that changes over time, a single
person gets you only one sample or maybe
two samples, the one that is in their
mother and the one that's in their
father.
And so, to get a high-resolution picture
of how the frequency changes over time,
you need to have very big sample sizes
of truly very large numbers of people.
And we just didn't have that until the
last few years. So, what motivates this
study that we're I think talking about
today and the work that hopefully
another number of groups will be doing
in the coming years is the fact that we
now finally have those numbers, and we
can do something with the data to see
how frequency changes over time.
>> And can I can I ask you
Um I'll be asking a lot of naive
questions for the next few hours, but
why are frequency changes especially
interesting?
>> So, what we're interested in is using
the experiment of nature that's occurred
uh in in our history over the last tens
of thousands of years to understand
what's uh biologically uh significant uh
in our in our DNA. And if there has been
a change in environment that
a population has experienced, for
example, people have shifted to
agriculture or begun living close to
domesticated animals or moved to a new
environment from a cold place to a warm
place or a a low place to a high place,
then there's pressure on the population
to adapt to these new stresses, these
new these new needs. And the way you're
going to detect that is you're going to
see that the frequency of a genetic
variant that, for example, might allow
you to live at higher altitude, for
example, or that might sort of nudge you
to have a different behavioral pattern
that might be advantageous in the new
situation, that genetic variant might
push systematically in some direction in
a way that is enough that you can detect
it. Now, it's very hard to detect slight
shifts in frequency by a few percent or
a 10% unless you have a very, very big
sample size. And so, what we're looking
for are those changes in frequency that
are too extreme to be due to chance,
then that will tell us that there have
been pushes in the against the biology
as a result of the changes in
environment that people have
experienced.
>> Interesting. Okay, so what did you guys
find?
>> So, seven years ago, uh
Ali Akbari, uh who is a
uh at the time was a post-doctoral
scientist in my laboratory, and a few
years later became a permanent staff
scientist in my laboratory, set out to
use the data that we were producing to
learn about biological change over time.
And I think the reason he was interested
in our laboratory rather than other
places was that a focus of our
laboratory has been generating truly
large amounts of data from ancient
humans. We've been really trying to
industrialize the process, make it very
inexpensive, make it high quality, and
generate large numbers of samples with
lots of good data for this purpose. So,
there's been this large amount of data
that we've generated, and it made it
possible to conceive again of asking the
question about whether there's been
frequency changes over time. So, the
mainstream view in human evolution in
the last several decades has been that
natural selection has been pretty
quiescent over the last several hundred
thousands of years of human history. And
there's several lines of evidence that
have been deployed to document this. One
is that if you compare diverse
populations from different continents
around the world, for example, Europeans
and East Asians, and you look at
mutations that differ in frequency
between these groups. All mutations
differ a little bit in frequency,
sometimes a lot. You can say, "What are
the most different mutations in terms of
frequency between Europeans and East
Asians?" And there's almost no genetic
changes that are 100% different in
frequency between Europeans and East
Asians. So, Europeans and East Asians
descend from a common ancestral
population 40 or 50,000 years ago that
came out of Africa in the Middle East.
This population had a set of gene
frequencies, genetic frequencies, and
these variants popped around
randomly, a process known as genetic
drift, or perhaps under selection in one
direction or another. And the time
that's passed since 40 or 50,000 years
ago is sufficiently small on an
evolutionary time scale that there's
just not much genetic differentiation on
average between these two groups,
Europeans and East Asians. But, however,
if there's been natural selection, for
example, to help people in one place
digest
digest alcohol better, or for example,
digest milk better, or do something else
better, what you might expect is that
there would be some mutation that would
have rocketed up to very high frequency.
And 40 or 50,000 years is a lot of time.
It's maybe 1,500 or 2,000 generations.
And so that might be enough time easily
to see a 100% different in frequency.
And yet you don't see any more compared
to what you'd expect by chance. So this
made it seem that just selection has
been quiescent. Maybe a few hundred
thousand years ago, the ancestral human
population got to some kind of optimum
and after that there hasn't been much
genetic change in one way or the other.
And there's been small amounts of
natural selection or there's been
selection to remove bad mutations that
are constantly raining down on the
genome, but not what we call directional
selection, which is newly arising
mutations or mutations being pushed in a
systematic direction to help the
population get to a different adaptive
set point that's that's that's more
favorable for the conditions that
population is living in.
So we were able to partition how much of
the changes in frequencies of of of all
the mutations that we're seeing in the
DNA, we're looking at about 10 10
million positions that vary, is due to
directional selection, adaptation,
versus other factors, especially genetic
drift. Uh and 98% of it is other
factors, especially genetic drift. So
it's overwhelmingly migrations and
population structure causing
fluctuations in frequency. And as a
result, it's super hard to actually
detect the signals of natural selection
in adaptive natural selection cuz
they're a tiny fraction of the total
frequency change. The vast majority of
it are these migrations and mixtures.
Nevertheless, there's so much natural
selection as our study thinks has shown
that in fact it's been rampant in the
genome.
>> Can I can I ask a clarifying question
here? So why are we discounting
population admixture or replacement as
selection? Because if you think about it
at a group level, if one population
replaces another population,
isn't that selection? I I remember from
the last episode you were explaining how
there's been huge changes in what kinds
of people are in a specific area. One
population came in and kind of replaced
the previous one, and then a new
population came in and replaced the
previous one. And to the extent that the
genetics are relevant to why that
population replaced the other one,
um why why why should that not count
towards
uh
you know, what we understand to be
selection over the last 10,000 years?
>> It it could count uh and may count and
probably should count in some respects,
but it could also be that this
population replacement is due to some
cultural phenomenon, uh technology held
by one of these groups not others. And
maybe there's some genetic mutations
that are contributing to this, who
knows? It's possible. Uh but what you're
seeing is a whole genome shift. And so
what we're looking to see is whether
there's one place in the DNA that is
driving the change in a way that's
different from the rest of the genome.
And really from a statistical point of
view, what happens at these times of
migration is there's just huge
fluctuations in frequencies, and these
are extremely uninformative times for
looking and detecting natural selection.
The best moments to detect natural
selection is when migrations and
population admixtures are not happening
for a few hundred years. And during
these times you can actually see the
mutations slowly blowing in one
direction as a result.
>> Yeah.
>> Really the way we think about the
history of Europe and the Middle East
and the way we think about it for the
purpose of this study is as an
archipelago of little populations in
space and time, each of which are pretty
isolated from each other. So a little
population in Britain isolated for a few
hundred years, a little population in
Hungary at isolated few hundred years
between big events of migration and
mixture. And in each of those little
experiments of nature, we can ask, does
this mutation slightly increase in
frequency? Does that same mutation
slightly increase in frequency? And if
all the arrows point in the same
direction, we win, and they're telling
us that natural selection is occurring.
So for example, 4,500 years ago in
Europe, almost all mutations go through
huge frequency changes, and that's not
because of natural selection, it's
because of the step migration from the
step north of the Black and Caspian Sea.
40%, 50%, 80% of the DNA becomes Yamnaya
from step pastoralists, and their
frequencies of mutations were different
not because of selection necessarily,
but just because they had evolved in
different places for thousands and tens
of thousands of years. And then if you
look at the descendant populations,
there's huge changes in frequency. And
it's very what you need to do is see,
"Oh, is natural selection explaining a
shift more than you would expect by
chance?"
>> Okay, in this next section, David
explains the nitty-gritty of the
methodology of this paper. It's honestly
a bit technical, and I wanted you to get
a sense of the results first, so I've
moved that section to the end. If you
want to understand the methodology, just
stick around for the full episode. Okay,
you found these locations that seem to
be under selection. Oh, another
clarifying question. So, you have
you say 3,800
locations which we're 50% confident are
have been under selection the last
10,000 years.
>> 7,200, which we're where we're 50%
confident. So, I think we're getting
about 7,200 positions in the DNA that
have 50% confidence of being real.
>> Yeah.
>> So, only half of those are real.
>> Uh I see.
>> So, 3,600, which don't know which ones.
So, 3,600 of them are real.
>> Okay, and
um does that also mean that outside of
those 7,200
you're confident the other locations in
the genome are not under selection.
>> No.
>> Okay.
>> So, if you look at the 25% probability
cut off, there will be tens of
thousands. Uh and there will be many
real ones there, too. In fact, multiple
analyses we do suggest that the genome
is vibrating with natural selection, and
uh there's all sorts of weaker effects
that are there that would be picked up
in larger studies even than we've done.
Uh and that uh in fact, almost every
position in the DNA is uh correlated to
a position that in being dragged in one
way or the other uh by natural
selection. Instead of being quiescent,
natural selection is everywhere. Even
though it's only 2% of the frequency
change, it's tugging the positions in
one direction or the other everywhere.
So, we analyzed these positions that we
had identified, these hundreds of
positions, the ones we were super
confident about, and we looked to see
whether they were randomly distributed
in the DNA or whether they had patterns.
And what we did is we looked at maybe a
hundred or so traits where there had
been genome-wide association studies for
all sorts of different traits, like ones
associated with immunity or autoimmunity
or behavior or metabolism and
basically other other things. And for
each of these we could ask, are there
genetic variations that are known to
affect these traits from genome-wide
association studies, do they have an
unusual number of genetic selection
signals? And what we found is there was
a vast enrichment by about a four- or
fivefold for immune traits. That is,
there was a super concentration of
selected signals in immune traits.
Whereas also we saw a strong enrichment
for metabolic traits, things that might
have impacted your obesity or fat traits
or type 2 diabetes. And really almost no
detectable enrichment as far as we could
tell for behavioral traits or for
for for psychiatric traits.
>> And just to make sure I understand, this
is not to say the behavioral traits or
psychiatric traits or cognitive traits
are not under selection, it's just that
the individual sites where such traits
are controlled are not especially likely
to be
among the locations that you've
identified as under selection.
>> Yeah, that's exactly right. So,
so it might seem from the results of
that analysis that in fact immune traits
are highly selected and that there's
been no selection for behavior in the
last 18,000 years in this part of the
world. But in fact that's a wrong
conclusion and in fact we have evidence
that that's a wrong conclusion. And in
fact, there's clear evidence of
selection also on behavioral traits. And
the reason we think we see, and we have
evidence that this is so, much weaker
signals for behavioral traits is that
behavioral traits, we know from other
studies, medical studies, are
underpinned by much larger numbers of
genes than immune traits, which are
underpinned by relatively small numbers
of genes of strong effect. Behavioral
traits are shaped genetically by very
large number of genes of weak effect,
and we just don't have the statistical
power to detect these very weak signals
there. So, when we do an analysis where
we look at our very strong signals of
selection, that collection of very
strong results is very effectively
querying the immune traits, but is not
very effectively querying the behavioral
traits. It may still be the case, and I
guess it is, that immune traits are the
most selected category, but is not at
all the case, and in fact, we can prove
it's not the case that behavioral traits
are not selected. So, we think there's
two reasons why natural selection has
we've been able to prove really that
there's two reasons why
uh
how to reconcile the previous
observations with our new observations.
Remember the previous observation is
that is that natural selection seems to
have been quiescent over a time scale of
hundreds of thousands or many tens of
thousands of years. Reason that you
don't see 100% different in frequency
variance across Europeans and East
Asians. So, now we're seeing hundreds of
positions that are rocketing up in
frequency with selection rates 1% or
more in a lot of cases. So, 1% or more
selection rates will mean that there'll
be a rapid doubling over periods of
dozens of generations. And so, over
1,500, 2,000 generations, like you see
separating Europeans and East Asians,
shouldn't you see many genetic variants
that are 100% differently different in
frequency across populations? So, we
were able to show that this is explained
by at least two factors. So, one of them
is that we actually in this part of the
world, Europe and the Middle East, are
in a period of accelerated natural
selection. And one way to see this is to
look at this enrichment pattern that
we're observing, where immune traits are
unusually associated with these
selection signals. And we could compare
the last 5,000 years of our of our time
period, with what's called the Bronze
Age and further onward,
uh to the previous 5,000 years. And what
we see is that this intensification of
selection around immune traits,
similarly the intensification around
metabolic traits, has accelerated over
this time period. So, it's not like
natural selection has been at the same
rate over all places and times. In fact,
it's increasing over the time period
we're analyzing. And so, plausibly the
whole time period has increased compared
to previous periods. So, we're in a
period of intensified selection. That's
not implausible, because this is a
population that went through a huge
shock in terms of the way people live
and the culture. So, this is a
population that almost everybody we're
analyzing are farmers or food producers
in one way or another. Farming was
invented for the first time anywhere in
the world in the Middle East 11 or
12,000 years ago. The people who
invented farming
exploded into Europe after 8,500 years
ago and spread across Europe and
expanded rapidly. In the Bronze Age,
there was an intensification of how
people lived with much higher population
densities, people living more and more
next to their animals and getting their
diseases and exchanging their diseases
with them and with each other. And so,
this is a period of rapid rapid change
in terms of how people are living,
resulting in different
biological
needs of this population. So, it's not
surprising, perhaps, that in the context
of these dramatic changes, the biology
of the population might be not in the
ideally adapted
position. That is, that there might be
what some people call an evolutionary
mismatch where you take
a a genetic
variation that's evolved in
hunter-gatherers and put it into farmers
or pastoralists and it's not exactly
right. And so what you're seeing is the
DNA of this population which is
descended from hunter-gatherers only
10,000 years ago reacting to the shock
of having been moved into an
agricultural and Bronze Age and high
population density and urban
environment. And a hypothesis is that
what we're seeing is the adaptation that
occurs as a result of that.
>> Interesting. Okay, so it might be
helpful to you you in the paper you have
you you have many examples of
this intensification of selection around
the Bronze Age. And so
feel free to navigate it yourself, but
it might be helpful to go through some
of these examples.
>> So we look one of the things we do in
this work is we look carefully at many
many of these positions in the in in the
DNA. We've actually have an internet
browser that you could look at called
the Ages browser that Ali and a
colleague of his who's a co-author for
our paper built that allows you to query
these each of these 10 million positions
and see the trajectories at each at each
position and the evidence for selection.
And one of the things that we see is
that while for the most part the the
signals of natural selection we detect
are consistent with being constant
natural selection over time in a handful
of them were able to see that there's
been a reversal or a radical change in
natural selection. And very often that
occurs in the period between 5,000 to
2,000 years ago which is the Bronze Age
and
Iron Age a period of rapid population
growth and rapid movement to intensive
use of of of
of many technologies that were not used
that way before. So an example of this
is the tick two genetic variant that is
a major risk factor for severe
tuberculosis which is the major
infectious disease the most important
infectious disease killer in the world
today.
And if you look at the this major risk
factor for tuberculosis, this variant
rockets up in frequency from eight or
6,000 years ago to maybe 9 or 10% in
this part of the world, and then it
rockets down in frequency in the last
3,000 years. In both cases, there's very
clear evidence of natural selection, in
the first case to increase in frequency,
and then in the next case to decrease in
frequency. And a possible reason for
this is maybe the spread of tuberculosis
maybe becomes endemic in the population
2 or 3,000 years ago. That's potentially
with a pathogen
sequence data and other lines of
evidence, and maybe this variant was
protecting against something before
then, but then tuberculosis became
significant after that point, and it was
so bad that it pushed in the opposite
direction. That's speculative.
>> Oh, interesting. And the thing it was
protecting against was probably another
disease?
>> Maybe.
>> Writing for this episode required a full
lit review. I needed to understand why
other methods had failed to find
evidence of natural selection over the
last 10,000 years. What exactly did
Reich and Akbari do differently?
Honestly, this was quite subtle, because
the most important points were
distributed across a bunch of different
papers. And it was frustrating to talk
to LLMs about it, because they kept
getting confused. One of them would fail
to understand an important crux, and so
I switched over to a different model,
and that one would get tripped up on the
very next point. I ended up using Cursor
to kick off a handful of models at the
same time, and compare their results
after. I could have one model critique
the response of another.
This was super useful, because while I'm
not a geneticist, I do have enough taste
to be able to say, "Hey, this answer
makes sense. These ones don't." I also
had Cursor turn this work into a flash
card, so I could retain what I learned.
Cursor started as a programming tool,
but I found it really great for this
kind of research. There's no other
interface where I can get answers from a
bunch of independent LLMs, all while
reading the relevant paper on the same
screen. Go to cursor.com/thircash
to try it out.
One of the big takeaways for me uh, from
the paper was just that something weird
happened in the Bronze Age.
And that
as you said, we're not like across trade
after trade the
selection intensifies during the Bronze
Age. And this makes sense for some
things. For example, why do we see
lactase persistence
where adults can process milk? Why is
that intensified during this period? Oh
well, it makes sense this is the time
when we don't we start using cattle not
just for the meat, but then also for
milk and wool and other secondary
products. So it makes sense this is why
lactose would matter lactase persistence
would matter more. But then there's
other things which seem like they should
have been relevant since the dawn of
agriculture. I forget the exact name of
the allele, but what was it FADS1
which helps convert plant fatty acids
into long-chain fatty acids that your
body needs. And that's also very
relevant when you move from a diet of
meat as a hunter-gatherer to a diet of
cereals.
But why why that is also one I think you
found was under a special selection or I
especially high selection during the
you know 5,000 3,000 years ago.
Yeah, so what's going on? Why is the
Bronze Age so special across all these
different traits that you're observing?
>> Right. So FADS FADS1/2 this variant it's
sort of a vegetarian / meat-eating
adaptation. And already in work prior to
this actually Ian Mathieson who
was a former colleague
worked with me in 2015 identified this
as a very strongly selected variant. And
it's actually been ancient. You see
copies in archaic humans, too.
One of the findings of our paper is the
blood system. You know, you get your
blood type it's AB and O. The B variant
has increased up to 10% at the expense
of A. But previous work has shown that A
and B were both already present in the
ancestor of humans and gibbons. You
know, other other other apes.
And so, these mutations, some of them
have been going back and forth and
fluctuating over time
in different time periods. But, we're
talking about changes in the Bronze Age.
So, this tick two variant for
tuberculosis risk, multiple sclerosis
risk variant inflected and increased in
frequency before the Bronze Age and then
two or three thousand years ago reversed
at that period and there's differences
in northern Europe where
strong, very strong positive selection,
very strong negative selection. And then
in southern Europe, only a little bit
and not even very strong negative
selection. And for hemochromatosis,
which is iron pathogenic iron build up
that causes problems in Europe.
That too has reversed around this period
in some of the complex traits that maybe
we'll talk about later. These traits too
have periods of intensification of
natural selection. For example,
depigmentation, which is the
Europeans have depigmented, gotten
lighter skin over the last 10,000 years.
You can see it in our data. The period
of strongest depigmentation is between
about 4,000 to 2,000 years ago. And then
after that it's much less. And so, this
seems to be a very impactful, eventful,
important period where a lot of the
processes that we are seeing become very
powerful. And it's surprising on first
principles. You might think before you
walked into this genetic data that the
big change is going to be starting to
grow plants and maybe farm animals. That
happens in the Neolithic. You know,
beginning 10 or 11 or 12,000 years ago
and spreads into Europe after 8,500
years ago. But, actually the
intensification happens like 5,000 years
ago, 4,000 years ago. And so, it's
really interesting. This This
observation of that being a key point,
that being an inflection point tells us
something about when humans, at least in
this part of the world, were wrenched
into a way of living that was so
different from how the hunter-gatherer
ancestors lived that the organism had to
adapt very strongly. And that may be the
degree of that wrenching process moving
into the Bronze Age was qualitatively
greater than the degree of the wrenching
process that happened from the initial
transition to growing plants. So, which
is surprising cuz our cartoon picture is
that the big transition is farming, but
the genetic data, the biological readout
is saying our genome is reacting much
more strongly to this these events that
happened 5,000 years ago.
>> So, you did some work with
Batty and many other colleagues in 2014.
You were looking at 20 or 30,000
African-American genomes today, and you
were saying, "Look, there's some
percentage, 80% West African DNA, and
then 20% European DNA. And can we look
at their
uh genomes today, and do we see that
their
uh allele frequencies are much different
than what you would just just expect
from this admixture?" Um and you find
Correct me if I'm wrong, but you found
that they weren't. That is to say that
over 200 300 years of extremely
intense environment change, you know,
going from, you know, yeah, chattel
slavery and uh
yeah, completely new environment, uh
there's no effect of natural selection.
And so, we see episodes like this where
we don't see natural selection, and then
but then
the Bronze Age apparently must have had
an even stronger effect, where the
change in environment is even stronger
than what we see from Africans in Africa
then being trans- migrated to the
to the New World and then living under
slavery.
>> That that may be the case. It also may
be the case that that period is just too
short to see much effect. So, what
you're looking in for in the Batty et
al. paper, where we looked at about
30,000 African-Americans and looked to
see whether there is, instead of the
average percentage of maybe around 80%
West African ancestry in some places in
the DNA more than 80% in some places in
the DNA less than 80% significantly as
you would expect if there was natural
selection from some genetic variant for
your from Europeans or from Africans. We
didn't see any place in the DNA that was
significantly different from what you
would expect by chance. And so
one possible explanation for that is
just that there's only a handful of
generations maybe five over which the
natural selection would operate. And so
maybe if the selection was 2% a
generation you would still only see
maybe a 10% compounded effect and
there's just not enough time to detect
it. But the Bronze Age is not 300 years,
it's 3,000 years. It's the power of
compound interest and you have enough
time to begin to see a strong effect.
But this really really really does seem
to be a very impactful time in terms of
human history and you can see it in our
complex traits. So for example if you
look at pigmentation for example
which is the strongest signal of
selection for a complex trait in
our data set. So you look at genetic
mutations that are known to affect
pigmentations. You add up their effect
across all of the DNA so there's dozens
or hundreds of them and you look to see
in what time or is the natural selection
strongest and the time period is really
2,000 to 4,000 years ago.
And for some of these other traits as
well you see again the time period over
which the selection is strongest is
2,000 4,000 years ago. So for example if
you look at genetic variants that affect
measures of cognitive performance for
example such as performance on
intelligence tests in
people in white British people today.
So this is of course a very strange
trait to measure in the past because
there were no intelligence tests and
there was no school, but it is a
predictor today and you could look at
how it's changed in the past. And we see
very strong natural selection for this
combination of genetic variants that
predicts people's performance in IQ
tests and also is highly correlated to
the predictor that predicts the number
of years of school or the household
wealth of people. All crazy traits in
the past because there was no wealth in
the past. There was no school in the
past. But if you look at the predictors
today, there is a strong
uh there is a strong movement in a
systematic direction,
a large effect about a standard
deviation on the scale of modern
variation. And then we can do this trick
of looking to see whether there's
periods of time when this natural
selection has occurred more intensely or
less intensely. What we do is we drag a
2,000-year window through our data and
we repeat our whole analysis not on
18,000 years, but just on a short
2,000-year window. And we can measure
the strength of selection in each of
these 2,000-year windows. And what you
see when you look at intelligence is you
see that this maxes out in the Bronze
Age between 5,000, 4,000, 3,000, 2,000
years ago. And the impact in the last
2,000 years is almost nothing. There's
no evidence of natural selection at all.
You might think your bias coming into
this, my bias perhaps, if there's any
signal of natural selection on this
trait at all, might be that it would be
unusually strong in the last 2,000
years. Maybe this is a time of
industrialization. Maybe this is a time
of greater need for this particular
trait. But in fact, there's no evidence
of natural selection at all in the last
2,000 years, but there's very strong
evidence in between 2,000 and 4,000
years ago, where instead of a one
standard deviation strength of selection
is a two standard deviation strength uh
sort of averaged over this time period.
>> And the the standard deviation here is
how much the
polygenic score for this trait itself
moves or
>> How much the polygenic score trait moves
uh over a 10,000-year period.
>> Got it.
>> Uh within a population that is held
constant in terms of its ancestry.
Because what's actually we're doing is
we're looking in our data set at a kind
of heterogeneous group of people.
There's, you know, Southern Europeans
and Northern Europeans and
hunter-gatherers and farmers and at
different times in the past, those
groups are more or less represented.
>> Yeah.
>> So, the whole strength of the
methodology that Liakbari developed is
it corrects for that uh changing
ancestry over time. And as I mentioned
before, really what's being asked here
is we've divided up our whole data set
into an archipelago of little
populations in different places in space
and time. And we're asking in each place
in space and time, a little pocket of
people in Britain from 4,000 years ago
to 3,500 years ago, a little pocket of
people in Hungary, a little pocket of
people in in Italy from 2,000 years ago
to 1,500 years ago. In each of these
places uh where the ancestry is
relatively similar without being too
disrupted in that short period by uh
migrations, we watch to see if the
genetic changes blow in the same
direction.
>> Yeah.
>> And what we're doing here is we're
measuring the strength of selection at
each point in time after correcting for
the big population changes that have
occurred.
>> Okay, so the the effect here is huge
then cuz like if you if you're saying
one standard deviation, um a standard
deviation above the median would be
somebody in the 85th percentile. So,
you're saying that the effect of
selection has been so strong that
compared to 10,000 years ago versus now,
um
you know, the
the the median has gone to the 85th
percentile. Um and that that's just like
a huge effect over the last 10,000 years
on something like intelligence or um
this the the thing that predicts
household income or whatever. Um so,
these seem like
especially given that this is only 2% of
the change in allele frequencies and
then like the 98% is coming from
migration. So, that then it's sort of
stupendous to think about like well,
what is the impact of migration then
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> this alone can explain um or is driving
a standard deviation change in these
kinds of qualities, at least among the
kind of variation we see in the world
today.
>> one one thing you can see in the data is
the migration impact is huge. So, for
example, if you look at the trajectory
for, you know, measures of cognitive
performance like, uh, scores on
intelligence test in white British
people today, but you look at the
predictor of that in people in ancient
times, the estimate for the
hunter-gatherers of Europe is like three
standard deviations below the modern
mean. So, that's hugely different. Uh,
and then you see a huge jump from them
to the hunter to the farmers who are
like, uh, at the mean, at zero. And
that's migration.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh, so, what you're seeing is those two
groups had different set points for
those traits. And then the step
pastoralists have a lower set value of
this. And so, you see huge fluctuations
in the predictor of this trait over
time. That doesn't prove selection. What
that is just telling you is migration.
But what our test is telling you is in
addition to those fluctuations due to
select uh, due to migration, is there a
consistent effect of natural selection
blowing the trait in the same direction
over all over all places and times? And
that's what we're detecting.
>> Yeah. So, there's this, uh, person who
has a theory of collective intelligence
hypothesis, which is this idea that, um,
the
selection for intelligence has actually
been in the opposite direction. That as
society has developed, there's been more
specialization. If there's more
specialization, each person only needs
to understand a smaller and smaller part
of the world. And, um, therefore,
actually the ancients were much smarter
than us, and we've sort of evolved out
of intelligence. And your results seem
to point in the opposite direction. That
although there's not been a selection in
the last 2,000 years as,
you know, society's gotten more
complicated, at least when society
began,
there was more need for the kind of
thing that predicts intelligence today.
And the reason that's surprising is if
you think about hunter-gatherers, um
yeah, reading your colleague Joseph
Henrich's book, the amount of
information that they needed to
hold on to and assess, everything from
um how to process food to how to build
shelters, fire, etc., compared to my
world where I got to like know how to
set up mics and ask questions, it's just
like
it seems like the demands on
intelligence should have been like way
higher in the ancestral environment. And
so, it's very surprising that the
beginnings of civilization increase the
um
the selection on intelligence.
>> Right. So, you know, this is the power
of data, right? Like, you know, the I
think Joe, if you asked him uh prior to
this work, uh what the hunter-gatherer
selection would be and where their set
point for
uh you know, this particular trait would
have been, you know, I think he probably
wouldn't have made a very strong
prediction, but he would have said,
"Well, maybe you would have expected it
to have a high predicted value of this
trait because these people were really
having to do a lot of things and figure
a lot of stuff out, maybe. Uh and that
maybe once you have more complex
societies, there'd be more of a
collective brain and maybe there'll be
selection against this trait. And in in
fact, it's sort of the opposite in some
ways." So, it's the power of data. It's
not what you expect. And you know, after
looking at this data, it's actually the
value of data to try to make sense of
all these things. You know, it's very
interesting like uh the genetic
predictor of intelligence, there's lots
of kind of things that are confusing
about it. So, it's actually worth
talking about it. Uh or the genetic
predictor of years of schooling, which
is highly correlated to it and is
measured even better.
So, if you look at the genetic predictor
of years of schooling, there's another
amazing study from 2017 from a group in
Iceland uh that looked at this measure
over the last 100 years in Iceland. And
it looked at older people, and it looked
at younger people, people born more
recently in Iceland. And there's a
estimated 0.1 standard deviation
decrease in genetic predictor of
intelligence in Iceland just within one
century is an absolutely huge effect
over a short period and this is
selection against years of schooling if
I said intelligence I didn't mean to
it's selection against the number of
genetic predictors of numbers of years
of school and so one possible
interpretation of this
sort of hand-wavy
is that actually what's being measured
here is not selection for years of
schooling or for actually real
intelligence but for another trait
altogether that's correlated to both of
them. So for example the predictor of
numbers of years of schooling is very
very strongly correlated to the age at
which women have their first kid and if
you control for that for number of years
of schooling all of the signal of years
of schooling goes away. So maybe what
you're measuring is women's decision
about when to have children and you know
if you have children earlier you don't
go to school as much if you have
children later you go to school more
maybe it's some kind of measurement of
delaying gratification or putting things
off or planning the same trait is
correlated to body mass index to obesity
or to walking pace. So is this really
like intelligence as we think about it
or is it something else that manifests
itself differently in different times in
the past.
>> Yeah.
Um
Okay so obviously a trait like years of
schooling was not itself a meaningful
thing in the past
and the underlying things for it seem to
have been
under strong selections of whatever in
the genome predicts years of schooling
seems to have been under strong
selection
and how should we think about this
like what is the actual thing that's
changing in the genome?
>> Yeah well I think that there's two
things going on that you need to think
about so one of them is that I
is that years of schooling is connected
to so many other things genetically. So
if you look at the genetic predictor of
years of schooling this trait has been
measured in millions of people now, it's
actually correlated to really, really
surprising things. It's correlated to
the age at which women have their first
kid. It's correlated to people's
obesity. It's correlated to people's
walking pace. It's correlated to
people's household wealth. It's
correlated to
a variety of other traits that seem
quite different from it. So, if you
think you're actually measuring years of
genetic prediction of intelligence or
years of or actual you know,
studiousness or something like that, you
should think again because there's many
things that it's correlated to. There
seems to be some kind of general trait
that maybe you could think of as
executive function or maybe propensity
to defer gratification or something or
I'm just just waving my hands that is
under selection and it pushes all these
traits in the same direction one way or
the other and in different times in the
past it's it's it's advantageous or
disadvantageous.
But when we found this signal of uh
years of schooling uh being increased,
the the
genetic propensity to go to school for
more years as it manifests itself to in
people in white British people today,
when we found this signal we were sort
of incredulous. Like, how could this be?
Maybe this is a problem. So, we did a
few tests to try to figure out whether
this was real. And one of the tests we
did is we looked for a study where this
measurement of the numbers of years of
school was done not in Europeans, but
was done in Chinese people in China. And
we looked at variants that had the
effect of many variants as they affected
the number of years of school in China
and we saw whether they had a
relationship, a correlation to the
trajectory of those same genetic
variants in Europeans over the last
10,000 years. So, these are two parts of
the world where the populations have
been essentially completely disconnected
and there's no way by chance that the
trajectory in Europeans over the last
10,000 years will have anything to do
with the number of years the effect on
the years of schooling in China today.
But there's actually a huge statistical
correlation, a five or six standard
deviation correlation between the effect
size of variance and number of years of
school in China today
and the trajectory in Europe. Just as
strong actually as the effect size of
variance in Europeans
to years of school to to the trajectory
in Europeans. So we just could not see a
way this could happen by chance and once
we saw that we really felt quite
convinced that this was a real signal
and that really somehow there has been
natural selection to increase the
genetic changes that today manifest
themselves as more years of school at
predicting more years of schooling.
>> All right, just to make sure I
understood you're saying you're
um
you know, you're you're looking at this
ancient DNA in Europe and you're saying,
well, it seems to predict years of
schooling for modern people in Europe.
Um or at least the selection on those
ancient DNA that ancient DNA seems to
predict more years of schooling in
modern Europe.
And then you also find, well, it also
predicts
how the same um variance predict more
years of schooling for Chinese people in
China.
>> Yeah.
>> And so this is not just some
weird artifact from the way these GWAS
were done in Europe. This seems to have
these parts of the genome seem to
robustly predict the kind of thing that
actually leads to more years of
schooling at least in people today.
>> Correct.
>> Jane Street is pretty secretive, but I
did learn about one internal mechanism
which illustrates how high trust and
weird their culture is. Researchers
aren't given computer allocations.
Instead, Jane Streeters use an internal
currency called Hive Bucks to bid for
compute in real-time auctions. Everybody
can spend as many Hive Bucks as they
want. But your Hive Buck bid is meant to
represent the real dollar value of the
experiment that you want to run. And
now, notably during the auction, anybody
can change anybody else's bid. And after
the auction, people can even kill each
other's jobs. People just trust each
other to do this in a way that benefits
the whole firm. As a result, Jane
Street's allocations reflect a near
real-time consensus on the highest
priority uses of compute. As Axel, one
of their ML engineers, put it, "I think
Jane Street's like pretty bottom-up in
terms of we have lots of different
researchers who are all training their
own models, sequence models, all sorts
of other weird and wonderful things." By
the way, with their new compute deal,
they've just added a $6 billion hive
bucks stimulus to their internal
economy. Jane Street is hiring
researchers, engineers, and interns. Go
to janestreet.com/thorkash
to learn more.
Okay, so
stepping back, I want to understand, I
think there's this question about
what what does this tell us about what
actually changed in our environments
over the last 18,000 years? And I
we talked a little about what happened
after the Bronze Age. I want to
understand, it's surprising to me we're
talking about this during the collective
intelligence part of the conversation,
but it's surprising to me that
things like
intelligence or lack of schizophrenia or
so forth, things that just seem kind of
robustly good, were not maxed out before
the Bronze Age. And in fact, there was
so much
the diversity among different
populations was so big that you have
the European hunter-gatherers
having three standard deviations less
predicted value for,
you know, what they would score on an
intelligence test if a test of it
existed.
But, you know, they were existing in the
real world, in a place where
intelligence matters. And so, how can it
be that
they this was not a We just look at the
human body or any animal, it's just like
this evolution has been acting on it so
strongly to make it functional at the
things it needs to do. And this one
thing, which seems like so relevant
especially to what human
hunter-gatherers needed to do,
is not under
doesn't seem to have been under that
strong selection
in the Mesolithic or Paleolithic or
those eras?
>> I think that that's a great question and
like as we talked about before,
the the the the the human atom selection
is very effective. You it can move the
mean value of traits within hundreds or
thousands of years in one direction or
the other if that's adaptive in a
particular environment. And so you might
wonder isn't intelligence good you know
in all context and place and a time. And
I think that there's a number of ways to
think about that. First of all, I think
we are speaking from the point of view
of a society which intensely values this
particular trait, you know, ability to
score well on IQ tests or things like
them or to go to school for a long time
or whatever it is. And I think this is
unprecedented in human history that we
live in a time like this. Like if you
look at the, you know, Hebrew and
Christian Bible and you look at how much
intelligence is valued. It's basically
not at all.
>> when when the Bible was being written,
especially the Old Testament, is exactly
when selection for intelligence is the
highest point it's apparently ever been.
>> Yeah, exactly. But like there's it's
about strength or courage or religiosity
or right those are the values, right? Or
if you read Homer
or the other texts of other religions,
it's not intelligence. It's it's beauty.
It's like other other things. And so
this value system which has a hyper
focus on, you know,
you know, smarts is not obviously a
trait trait value that's been common in
the past. You might think that in
certain communities like, you know, some
communities or not there might be
valuation of things that are more
proximate to, you know, years of
schooling, but really broadly it's not
been a high value in the population.
>> Um but obviously that the thing we're
referring to is not or the thing we care
about is not direct performance in an IQ
test, especially in the past. The I
think the thing I'm trying to understand
better is this
is intelligence more broadly and maybe
just that IQ test intelligence is not
that correlated with
here is a new
world environment and go figure out how
to process food there and make shelter
and everything else. All the things
which you know your colleagues like
Joseph Henrich have talked about like
the how modern people underestimate the
difficulty of
um
doing this kind of thing with a small
band of people. Anyways, this is say
like
maybe that's not IQ test intelligence
and that's why we don't see that strong
a selection effect on this thing. But
I just intuitively it seems like
regardless of the value system it just
seems very valuable to
have this trait maxed out.
>> So I'm being very speculative and let me
give you two examples about how about
what this is about in my head how I'm
thinking about this and not that I'm a
particularly good authority on these
things. But as I mentioned a lot of
these traits which are quite disparate
are highly correlated to each other.
Obesity, years of schooling, walking
pace, you know, performance in IQ tests,
household all these crazy traits all
seem to be governed to a substantial
extent by a shared combination of
genetic variants. And let's just think
about what this might mean. So in
Iceland in the last 100 years there's
been selection against this combination
of variants.
And one possible interpretation is it's
basically selection for two ways of
investing in your children. Having many
kids and not investing a lot in them or
having few kids and investing more in
them. Right? So if you invest in
deferring deferring having kids but
becoming you know having more wealth,
having more resources and putting more
into each kid you're going to have lower
fertility and you're going to have fewer
kids. And that's going to result in
lower fertility but those kids might
survive more and do better in society.
Alternatively you can just have as many
kids as you can and invest less in them.
They might have individually less good
outcomes but in a time of plenty which
is potentially Iceland in the 20th
century it might make sense to have more
kids and invest less in them. And so
there's a toggle between having more
kids and investing less in them and
having more kids and investing in less
in one's life
and having fewer kids and investing more
in excelling in various ways or
something like this. And so you can
imagine that actually at different times
and in different places in any ecology
there's resource there's different ways
like mammals often invest a lot in with
a pregnancy and a small number of
children whereas fish will spawn huge
numbers of offspring into you know the
the the river the great majority of whom
will be eaten
but that is an effective way to produce
offspring in certain conditions. So
there'll be a toggle depending on the
environmental conditions back and forth
between investing in large numbers of
offspring with fewer and less investment
or smaller numbers of offspring with
more investment and maybe we're just
seeing that move back and forth over
different places and times. Similarly
for schizophrenia and bipolar disease
how could this ever be advantageous? But
maybe what we're seeing with these
diseases is a kind of read out of some
kind of
spectrum of traits that actually in in
some context might be advantageous.
Maybe being anxious or being
imaginative or being neurotic might be
helpful in a shamanistic tradition you
know in a religious tradition which
values people who can have visions or
values people who can be creative and
maybe these are subclinical versions of
schizophrenia or bipolar disease that in
certain times may be advantageous and in
other times may be disadvantageous.
Maybe you're just seeing selection from
different types of creativity or other
thinking that can be valuable in
different contexts. I'm waving my hands
here but my sense is that these complex
traits
have not pushed in one direction because
there's advantage there's spectrums
where there's advantages to both ends of
the spectrum and there's
multi-dimensional
uh, you know impacts of these different
traits.
>> Mhm. Uh, Julian Jaynes has this famous
theory in The Origins of Consciousness
in the Bicameral Mind that
I'm butchering this, but fundamentally,
the way I understand it is that up until
Homer, basically everybody was
schizophrenic.
>> [laughter]
>> Um, in the sense that people
people genuinely thought that
gods or whatever were real people that
you were communicating with. And his
claim is that ancient texts seem to show
people behaving in this way or
>> You're being asked to believe in
visions.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> and even today, I think, you know,
there's valuation in some religious
communities and, you know, communicating
with God and having visions and having
supernatural communions. And so,
uh,
I just don't know.
>> Yeah.
>> But I think it's super interesting to
imagine to to to ask the question why
certain traits are not always
advantageous. For schizophrenia and
bipolar disease, there is a sense in
which most of the mutations are
disadvantageous. We can see that from
the patterns of variation where the
variants that are risk factors tend to
be low frequency, and they tend to be
small effects.
>> So, another trait you find under
selection is, um,
the trend away from body fat since the
agricultural revolution.
W- Why is that?
>> So, this is, uh, what you see as a
reduction in the combination of genetic
mutations that make you at risk for
obesity, body mass index, and similarly
and very correlated to it, higher fat
mass, higher waist-to-hip ratio, higher
type 2 diabetes risk. And so,
there is clear selection by about a
standard deviation on the scale of
modern variation for these traits,
reducing about 10,000 over the last
10,000 years, uh, in this part of the
world. So, what can be going on there?
Why was there not selection for this
combination of traits before? There's a
long-standing idea known as the thrifty
genes hypothesis. The idea is that, uh,
that once you have hunter-gatherer
populations that move into a farming
environment where there's plentiful
food, there is no longer a need, uh, to
the same extent to be able to build up
body fat to sort of survive in times of
stress because there's more constant
stores of food. And so, as a result,
there will be no there will be natural
selection against body fat, which can be
uh once you move into an agricultural
environment into periods of food plenty.
And so, maybe what you're seeing is that
this
group of people in Europe and the Middle
East over the last 10,000 years has
moved into a a period of relatively more
stable food, where building up stores of
fat are not as advantageous, and there's
been selection against this combination
of traits. Europeans actually are
relatively better protected genetically
against type 2 diabetes than some other
populations around the world like
African-Americans and Native Americans
that have perhaps not been as exposed to
agriculture for as much time. So, you
may be seeing the effect of more
exposure to more stable food
accessibility.
>> Mhm. This is also another way in which
the data goes against
a common story. And the common story is
that hunter-gatherers actually had much
more stable diets because they were more
varied, and so they weren't reliant on a
single cereal or a single crop for their
calories. And if, you know, if one game
went away, they had other things that
they could scout for, they could move
locations more easily cuz they weren't
tied down to the land. Um
and so, they were more food stable. But
in fact, if there's been selection
against storage of body fat, that
suggests that
as um as unstable and as common might
have been in agricultural societies,
it's at least more stable than what the
hunter-gatherers had.
>> I think there's a time scale issue.
You're absolutely right. So, I think, as
I understand, and I'm no anthropologist
and no
but my understanding is that when
there's a hunt in some of these uh in in
in traditional uh societies or
communities that hunt, people will often
gorge themselves and eat a huge amount
and build up a sort of temporary store
of fat, and then go with multiple days
without eating meat sometimes until the
next hunt. And so there is this sort of
boom-bust access to high-value nutrition
that is not true to the same extent in
farming communities. On the flip side of
this, these long these famines are I
think something that occurs more
commonly in agricultural societies, but
the time scale and the tempo of them is
very different from the hunting tempo.
So maybe there's a famine every 3 years.
And indeed, if you look at the bones of
farmers, at least in some communities,
there's more stress in them, maybe due
to a famine every 3 years or a famine
every 5 years. But selection might not
be acting on that 3-year time period.
Your fat store
from, you know, the latest hunt is not
going to carry you through to the famine
3 years later. And so survival of
famines is a different thing than
building up body fat
for being able to survive 2 weeks later.
>> Mhm.
A kind of random question I have is
if we you were mentioning, "Look, as
compared to these other things which
matter much more for fitness and in the
natural environment, the immune system,
especially after the Bronze Age, um
all these other things have mattered
more than intelligence. And so they've
been under much more selective pressure
than intelligence."
>> Right.
>> That makes you wonder whether there's
much more room at the top for
intelligence. As in if humans had been
selected especially for intelligence,
they could have been much smarter. And
the reason that's relevant is
we're currently building AI systems
which we're trying to make as smart as
possible. In fact, the only goal of the
training process is intelligence. We
don't have to worry about also at the
same time making their immune systems
powerful and
>> We have lots of energy to spend on it,
right?
>> And at the same time making sure they're
not schizophrenic. I guess we kind of
don't worry about that. Um
but um
if intelligence has not been the
dominant trait under selection for
humans
over the last 10, 20, 100,000 years,
does that mean that there's more room at
the top for this trait?
>> I think there's more room at the top for
a lot of these traits. Yeah. I think
that you can move height very extremely
in one direction much more than it is
today. You can move any of these traits
very much more extreme in the other
traits. There's probably very strong
negatives to doing that. You're probably
sacrificing other things.
And I think that there's trade-offs
probably. But I think it's highly likely
that if natural selection was pushed
pushed any of these traits in more in
one direction than it is, the mean would
move.
>> Mhm. So all of this
evolution since out of Africa is acting
on alleles that already exist in the
pool of human variants from that first
group which we were talking about last
time on the order of 10,000 people that
you know exploded out of
out of Africa. And it's a
Is it
Is it surprising that
across all these different traits from
cognitive profiles to
resistance to different kinds of
diseases to
um height to whatever that that one pool
of people contained so much latent
variation that they could supply the
you know enough you know stretchiness to
accommodate all these different traits
that you're studying now?
>> Um
That's a rich question and I think that
the human population has within it for
complex traits a tremendous amount of
variation. So
within the human population there's a
huge amount of variation that affects
height. There's a huge amount of
variation that affects body mass index.
If you take all these mutations and all
set them to the high height variant, a
person will be extremely tall, like as
tall as a tall building. You know, if
you of course which will never happen.
But if you take all these variants that
affect schizophrenia risk, they will and
you point them all in the same
direction,
there will be extreme risk or extreme
protection for schizophrenia. So for
complex traits, ones underpinned by many
mutations, all the variation already
exists to move the population to a
different adaptive set point that's
optimal in the environment which it's
in. So, if you push the population into
a new environment within hundreds or
thousands of years, the population can
rapidly move to a new adaptive set
point. There are some unusual traits
like ability to digest cow's milk or
protection against sickle cell anemia
that require a single very important
mutation that may not yet exist in the
population. And then you have to wait
for the mutation to occur in some some
people. And when the populations are
relatively small, only 10,000 people,
you might have to wait dozens or
hundreds of generations for that
mutation to arise. But when the
populations are large, there's not
mutation limiting anymore. Every
mutation that can occur does occur.
There's 8 billion people in the world.
There are maybe 30 new mutations every
generation. So, that's like what is it?
It's like 240 billion new point
mutations every generation. There's only
3 billion DNA bases in the genome. So,
every mutation that can occur does occur
about 100 times every generation. And
we're not mutation limited anymore. And
so, it's not like you have to the
mutations can arise again. They do arise
again. But when the population's only
10,000, you have to wait dozens or
hundreds of generations sometimes for
the new mutation to occur.
>> And so, how likely is it that the thing
that changes the Bronze Age is just that
the human population was big enough? So,
you 3000 BC you go to I think a
population of 50 million-ish people. Um
the population is big enough that and
the gene flow between different areas is
high enough such that
things which don't have an overwhelming
selection coefficient, which aren't
overwhelmingly favored by evolution, are
finally visible
uh
visible to selection.
>> I think that's not likely to be true,
but it's extremely interesting thing to
think about. So, I think already when
population sizes are on the order of a
million so or so. Every mutation that
can occur does occur within a few
generations. And so that's well before
the Bronze Age if you take the
population even if a place like Europe,
but also also of of other places or
maybe it's at the dawn of the Bronze Age
or the farming period.
So the the question you ask is maybe
when the population is small natural
selection doesn't work effectively. So a
common thing that people
think about with natural selection and
that is true is that in small
populations selection doesn't work
effectively. Um and that's because
mutations bop around in frequency from
generation to generation a lot in a
small population just randomly. So if
you have a population of size of 1,000,
populations very mutations will bop
around by a frequency of 1 over 1,000
every generation. And if the selection
coefficient is less than that, it will
be drowned in the random bopping around
of frequencies due to genetic drift. But
that is already for a population of
1,000 0.1% selection coefficient is very
weak. We're talking about 1% effects and
that's much very strong. It will work
very well even in a population of a size
of 1,000 or 10,000.
If you are talking about mutations of
the type that will start rising in only
in large populations, but not small
populations, those are selection
coefficients that are on the scale of 1
over 10,000 or 1 over 100,000. And those
ones will take 10,000 or 100,000
generations to rise in frequency, which
is hundreds of thousands or millions of
years. So that's not going to do
anything over the time scale we're
talking about. There's just a time scale
issue. So we're talking about strong
measurable selection coefficients on the
order of half a percent or more in this
study and all of those are going to work
in small populations or large
populations. It's not going to be
affected by the population size.
>> Interesting, but you're saying more
generally once you hit a given threshold
of population, the dominant factor is
time span not population size.
>> Correct.
>> Okay, interesting.
>> It's very interesting. And it's actually
not widely understood. Yeah.
>> Okay. So, speaking of
data contradicting what you might have
otherwise assumed,
uh
one of the papers you sent me
beforehand, Malik 2016, found that there
were not fixed differences between
modern and archaic humans 50,000 years
ago.
Um
and of course, we know this is the
period in which the so-called cognitive
revolution happened and modernity
started and people are making art or
whatever.
Um
Does this suggest that nothing
biological changed to make modern humans
modern and some
the thing that happened was some
cultural change? How how do we
understand what this data tells us?
>> Right. 50,000 years ago or so or maybe
100 100,000 to 50,000 years ago, there's
a quickening of the pace of change in
culture. So, people you see the first
extensive
representational art and like bead
necklaces and drawings on the wall and
so on and so forth and also a rapid
increasing pace of innovation the types
of tools that people use. And so, the
thought might be that there was going to
be have been some kind of genetic
switch, a kind of uh important genetic
change that uh was occurred in the
population and that swept to high
frequency and that everybody suddenly
had soon had and that made it possible
for do these to do these things maybe
some genes that have allowed people to
have
like complex language, representational
language, for example.
And so, one thing that we did in 2016
in this paper by Shop Malik and
colleagues, uh is we looked across the
DNA for places that might be expected to
look like this that where all people
living today or nearly all people living
today share a common ancestor uh maybe
100,000 or 200,000 years ago. And we
looked really hard and right across all
the DNA we could look at, we couldn't
find anything more than four or 500 more
recent than four or 500,000 years ago.
This is like a crazy result because uh
it looks like there's no key selective
sweeps that have occurred in this period
that is ancestral to everyone living
today. We talked before about no
selective sweeps between Europeans and
East Asians, but there don't even seem
to be any selective sweeps between like
shared between all humans in this really
important period when a lot of
evidence in the material culture record
appears. And so, it could be that
there's biological adaptation in this
period, but it's polygenic. There's lots
of mutations that all shift in the same
direction to help the population to move
to a new set point, but there's no key
biological change that rises to high
frequency in this time.
>> And this group, uh 50,000 years ago,
they're are the ancestors of everybody
out of Africa or also some Africans?
>> So, this is 100 to 50,000 years ago, and
uh this is the population that's
ancestral to West Africans, to most East
Africans, to all non-Africans. And
there's a couple of populations in
Africa that have substantial ancestry
that comes from more divergent groups.
Uh for example, Khoisan uh from Southern
Africa or Central African rainforest
hunter-gatherers have substantial
fractions of their ancestry from groups
that diverged maybe 200,000 years ago
from the other lineages. But all of
these groups today are able to do go to
college, do everything everybody else
does. And so, there is like no evidence
that there is any key mutation lacking
in some groups that are not present in
the others.
>> Mhm. So, um
the the differences we see between
different groups of people, um
especially if this group of people 50 to
100,000 people uh years ago had a very
small population size. I think the last
time we were discussing on the order of
10,000 people.
>> Yeah.
>> So, basically
everybody in the world or almost
everybody in the world, um or the
variants we see between different humans
today was latent in this group and which
is it was sort of seems
and I guess your point is that well
if you just stack up different
different
things across the genome then stacking
them up really has a big effect but that
it's interesting that like we have so
many different groups in the world today
and
that all that diversity
comes from a very small population
>> a lot of us in human genetics think that
the
our population contains within it the
clay that's needed to make almost any
trait
and that depending on environmental
conditions or selection conditions the
mean value of these traits will move in
different directions. There's an
empirical question a real question about
how much selection there's been
in different human populations over
time. One of the things this new work
that we're involved in is doing is
showing that at least in the last 18,000
years 10,000 years 5,000 years in this
part of the world there actually has
been significant movement at least for a
handful of important traits. We looked
at more than 500 traits about 100 of
them
complex traits showed significant
movement in systematic direction over
this time period. So it really does seem
that there is a response to the
environments people are living in that
is occurred over this period and is
potentially stronger than in previous
periods.
>> Crusoe has an amazing animal infra team
that keeps finding clever ways to
squeeze more performance out of their
hardware. For example, tokenization has
become a real bottleneck for agentic
workloads. Agentic problems are often
extremely long. They tend to have high
KV cache rates which shrinks the GPU's
pre-fill work. This means that the
tokenization step which is traditionally
sequential is a much larger fraction of
time to first token. To solve this
Crusoe built fast tokens an open source
rust based tokenizer which paralyzes
things in order to take advantage of all
the cores on modern CPUs. Crusoe had to
get creative here because a naive
approach doesn't work. For example, for
pre-tokenization, you can't just split
your text into chunks and run regex
because you'd end up with issues
whenever a word straddled the split.
Crusoe solved this by giving each thread
an authority zone plus the ability to
read 1 kilobyte past its own edges. This
1 kilobyte buffer guarantees that you
won't misprocess a token and the
authority zone guarantees that you won't
end up with duplicates. No cross-thread
coordination required. Crusoe combined
this optimization with a handful of
other smart tweaks in order to get up to
40% faster time to first token on real
production workloads. To learn more, go
to crusoe.ai/thorgash.
We were talking earlier about how
there's no fixed differences between um
humans 30,000 years ago and humans
today.
So, if there's no genetic basis for
uh
the kind of thing that allowed humans to
have more symbolic representation, have
farming, etc.
I think I asked you this question last
time we talked, but especially with this
context, why no farming before the ice
age? Genetically, we were there.
>> such an interesting question. Right,
genetically, we're there. The common
ancestral population has all of the
ingredients for farming 50,000 years
ago.
Uh and you know, these people are
distributed into different parts of the
world, the Americas, you know, 15,000
years ago or whatever it is. Uh you
know, New Guinea 40,000 years ago, East
Asia, you know, Europe, you know, West
Africa.
No farming develops uh
before you know, 12 or 11,000 years ago.
It only develops in the last, you know,
12,000 years, the period known as the
Holocene, which is sort of the end of
the ice age. And if you talk to climate
scientists uh and archaeologists, you
know, I keep asking people this question
every time I meet someone who's an
expert in this, it's like, how can this
be that farming develops in all these
places? Are we really living in such an
unusual time? And people tell me,
indeed, we're We're in an un- very
unusual time on a scale of 2 million
years. That is 12,000 years ago we
switched into this period of not just
warmth, but climate stability. And that
and that actually this is true. And it's
sort of hard to believe that we're
living in special such a special time.
But if you look at for example uh data
from the bottoms of ponds where you can
measure the fluctuations of temperatures
using isotopic signatures, apparently
we're in a period where it's just
fluctuating a lot less year to year and
see and 10 years to 10 years and 100
years to 100 years and it's just a
period of relative stability that we are
miraculously living in and that when
this period of relatively stability
happens, you somehow the it follows that
multiple groups independently turn to
agriculture even though the genetic
complement uh you know all of whom have
the same genetic complement that arises
50,000, 100,000, 200,000, 300,000 years
ago. It's kind of a crazy observation
that people just accept, uh but it's
like unbelievable.
>> Oh, so
you you
>> You increased the range there. So you
said 100,000, 200,000, 300,000 years
ago. And we based on the genetic
differences between modern
modern people and people from even
300,000 years ago, you think basically
there's
they're modern 300,000 years
>> I don't know. Like I'm thinking about
this all the time right now. This is
actually like actively what I'm thinking
about right now. And like you know,
there's a big transformation in terms of
the culture of humans 300
400,000 years ago. This invention of
level of technology, the ability to make
stone tools out of cores. The Middle
Stone Age revolution or the Middle
Paleolithic revolution depending on
whether you what you call it in Africa
or Eurasia. And this is a
revolution, a new way of making stone
tools that's shared by Neanderthals and
by modern humans, but is not shared in
East or South Asia. Um and it's a big
change and it involves a cognitive
change presumably in order to make this
sort of technology. And then there's a
further change to the Upper Paleolithic
later Stone Age, Uh uh maybe uh 100 to
50,000 years ago, uh when there's a
second transition where the new type of
tool making, but not as revolutionary as
the earlier one. So, when the cognitive
leap happens is unclear. The
diversification of the lineages leading
to people living today, like Khoisan
Southern Africans and rainforest
hunter-gatherers, and uh that all occurs
more on the time scale of 300,000 or
200,000 years. Uh and all of these
people are capable of, you know, going
to college and doing everything. And so,
you know, it's not obvious that all the
toolkit, the cognitive toolkit, the
behavioral toolkit, the genetic
abilities uh were not all in place 2 or
300,000 years ago, and that even
Neanderthals had them, right? So, it's
not obvious that this was not the case.
And so,
like
I just don't know. You sort of
distribute these people descended from
this diversification that happens 200,
300,000 years ago to different parts of
the world, and then bing, you know,
after 12,000 years ago, you start having
agriculture popping up in different
places. It's kind of an outstanding
mystery of human history. And, you know,
I I find it unbelievable that we live in
a place in a time period that
climatologically is so unique on the
scale of 2 million years, but my
colleagues tell me it's true.
>> The climate thing seems surprising given
there are so many different environments
in which
agriculture was independently developed.
I I now I understand that across
environments the variance could have
gone down, but it's just like if if it
only had happened in one place at one
time, I would I could have bought that
explanation, but the fact that they're
making maize in the New World, and
they've got um
uh
you know, cereals in the Old World, and
so forth, and it's just in a very
different environments makes it
surprising that
>> very surprising. And I think we accept
it, but it's just like a crazy
observation that most normal people
don't realize. You know, the thing that
basically everybody accepts is that the
common ancestral population of almost
everybody in the world except for
rainforest hunter-gatherers and Khoisan
is like around 70,000 years ago. And
everybody accepts that these people all
have in place the cognitive, behavioral,
intellectual ingredients that are
necessary for the farming revolution and
state building state societies. Because
when these descendants of these people
get distributed to West Africa, to East
Africa, to the Americas, to Europe, to
South Asia, to East Asia, to New Guinea,
and so on, their descendants all do this
like independently or semi-independently
or completely independently or
demonstrably completely independently in
all these different parts of the world.
So, the cognitive resources for doing
this must have all been in place, but
it's a very long fuse. Like it delays
for 40,000 years, for 70 So, you know,
60,000 years in all these different
places after the common ancestral
population splits up. And then, you
know, ignites into like agriculture and
all these other things after that point.
It's kind of a crazy claim. You know,
and then you could argue about whether
the actual fuse is 300,000 years, you
know, from when Neanderthals separated
from when different lineages of extant
modern humans separated. And that's also
plausible. So, it's kind of a crazy sort
of set of things that we're being asked
to believe.
>> Is it possible that agriculture existed,
but you didn't have modern metallurgy or
whatever it was that allowed populations
to explode starting in
5,000 BC with the Bronze Age? Cuz like
population-wise, it doesn't seem like,
you know, 10,000 BC to 5,000 BC, the
early Neolithic, much is happening. It's
Is it possible that they had farming,
but they didn't have copper, they didn't
have tin, uh which you needed to go to
I guess the Middle East for to develop a
civilization that could make use of
bronze at a large scale. And so, they
just disappeared from the historical
record?
>> I I think we would see their
archaeology. And like, you know, the
extraordinary developments in the
Americas, uh
which are entirely Stone Age.
>> You you would see them today if if they
had gone completely vanished.
>> Oh, yeah. I mean, there's like, you
know, you know, we we should go for a a
trip to Teotihuacan in Mexico. And it's
like like so impressive. Like, you know,
I when I went there when I was 20, you
know, it's just like it's totally as
impressive as ancient Egypt. You know,
it's like huge. It's massive. It's
without metal.
>> And it's um it's even more impressive
because it's not only without metal, but
it's without animals and without wheels,
which is crazy. Like,
the marvel is just like Right. How is
that wheels?
>> Right. Like, take any person who has
like an Oldsmobile or Ferrari and like
take them to these places and they will
not have it anymore. It's just
extraordinary what's in these places.
And these are people who separated
20,000 years ago at least from the
ancestors of East Asians and 40,000
years ago from the ancestors of West
Eurasians. And you know, just had the
same biological, you know, cultural
shared tool kit from then, but there's
just a a fuse a long fuse delay until
all this stuff happens. It's kind of
like an amazing thing and we don't
question it.
>> What are other questions you have that
um peop- uh
Yeah, you're you're either are
investigating right now or want to
investigate these kinds of big picture
questions of human history.
>> I think that I'm I mean, I'm
I'm perplexed. I don't know if we talked
about it before, but like I remain very,
very confused about the relationships
between archaic and modern humans. We
have genome sequences now from archaic
humans who lived in Europe and the West
Eurasia and Central Eurasia and
Neanderthals. We have archaic sequences
from these enigmatic Denisovans who we
now have
a skeleton for since we last talked.
There's now a
skull from a Denisovan that's been shown
to be a Denisovan.
And we have data from lots of modern
humans,
and there's really big mysteries about
the relationships amongst these groups.
So, genetically, the Denisovans and the
Neanderthals are sisters. They descend
from a common ancestral population 5 or
600,000 years ago, and that group
descends a couple hundred thousand years
before
7 or 800,000 years ago from the common
ancestors of modern humans.
And so, genetically, the whole genome
data says that Neanderthals and
Denisovans are archaic humans from a
common ancestral archaic population.
But, there are so many things shared
between Neanderthals and modern humans
that don't seem to be shared between
with East Asians.
They both share
Middle Stone Age stone stone tools level
of technology, this cognitively unique
type of way of making stone tools that
wasn't used in East Asia. They both have
the same mitochondrial DNA and Y
chromosome sequence. So, the Y
chromosome sequence of Neanderthals, the
mitochondrial DNA of Neanderthals is
actually modern human that came through
interbreeding 2 or 300,000 years ago and
then shot up to 100% frequency. And
then, Neanderthals and modern humans are
both the product of mixture events that
happened between archaic and modern
humans 300 or 200,000 years ago as
demonstrably through patterns of
variation in ancient and modern DNA. And
so, it feels that there's something
shared between Neanderthals and modern
humans that's not shared with
Denisovans, even though the vote of the
whole genome says that Denisovans and
Neanderthals are related. So, one
wonders whether there's something
connecting kind of
Neanderthals and modern humans that's
different from Denisovans, even though
genome-wide Denisovans and Neanderthals
cluster. So, I'm thinking about that all
the time now.
>> And then, connecting them would be
interbreeding events or being in the
same place at the same time that we
missed.
>> There's a known interbreeding event from
the lineage leading to
modern humans into Neanderthals, but
it's supposed to be only 5%. So, I'm
interested in that that that 5% is
actually a sign of something much more
impactful. That is that somehow
Neanderthals are in some sense deeply
modern in some ways and even though they
get swamped by archaic genes that
somehow they're actually have more of a
modern impact than one would think and
that the Middle Stone Age and you know,
Middle Paleolithic Revolution that they
shared with modern humans is actually
more fundamentally a part of who they
are in some sense that we think.
>> Interesting. I I sorry, when was this
interbreeding event?
>> 300,000 to 200,000 years ago.
>> And so, the common ancestor between
Neanderthals and most humans alive today
is potentially more recent than the
common ancestor between all humans alive
today.
>> Oh, for sure.
>> Yeah, which is crazy.
>> Yeah, well, you not not
the divergence to all the archaic humans
including Denisovans is within human
variation. So, but
>> Wait, what?
>> Yes. So, the average time to the common
ancestor of any two human genes is one
or two million years ago.
So, like if you look at any bit of your
DNA that you get from your mother and a
bit of your the same bit of your DNA on
the same chromosome copy of chromosome
three you get from your mother and the
copy of chromosome three you get from
your father, typical time they share
common ancestor is one or two million
years ago. That's before the split from
Neanderthals and Denisovans.
So, there's many places in your DNA
where you're more closely related to a
Neanderthal on your mother's side than
you are to your father.
>> And um, I'm sure that there is a simple
explanation, but how?
>> This is it's the same reason that like
if you have like a sister, you know,
you're in some places in your DNA more
closely related to her than you are to
me because you share a parent, but in
other places you're more closely related
to me than you are to your sister
because you happen not to share the same
DNA from your parents. It's a process it
it's just that the DNA that we get from
our common ancestral population was
already quite variable I see 500,000
years ago, 700,000 years ago, a years
ago and some of us descend from some of
those ancestors, and others of us
descend from other those ancestors, and
Neanderthals split from our lineage
really close in time on human
evolutionary time scale, such that in
some places in our DNA we're more
closely related to Neanderthals than to
each other.
>> Interesting. Um what are the other big
questions?
>> I think that's the main thing that I'm
thinking about a lot these days.
Uh you know, I think that I'm really
continue to be very obsessed with
questions about the spread of human
populations around the world and trying
to reconstruct that with ancient DNA.
>> After the recording ended, David started
spontaneously explaining a new theory
he's working on about Neanderthal
genetics on a whiteboard in the room,
which I ended up capturing on my iPhone.
>> The thing I'm thinking about a lot
recently is the possibility that it's
maybe we're not thinking
in the right way about the relationship
between archaic and modern humans.
Uh so, the standard model is one like
this, where
uh
Denisovans, these archaic humans that
were found from ancient DNA, and
Neanderthals
descend from a common ancestral
populations 5 or 600,000 years ago.
>> [snorts]
>> And that these two separate earlier
maybe 700 to 800,000 years ago
>> [snorts]
>> from the ancestors of modern humans,
people like us.
So, that's the big result of a lot of
studies since 2010.
Uh
but there's also evidence of a
interbreeding event
uh that happened maybe 200 to 300,000
years ago.
Uh
and that actually turn resulted in
uh modern humans
uh contributing DNA
to the ancestors of Neanderthals. So,
this is maybe 5% of the DNA of
Neanderthals comes from this
interbreeding event and a lot of studies
have shown this.
And so, uh I'm very interested in this
because
uh actually from the archaeological
record, Neanderthals and modern humans
sort of look actually quite similar to
each other. Much more similar to each
other than in a lot of them do to
Denisovans, these archaic humans in East
Asia. Uh so, a lot of the history people
have thought that Neanderthals are our
sister, but then
it but in 2010, the sequencing of the
Denisovan genome made it very clear that
on average Denisovans are closer to
Neanderthals than to modern humans. So,
this was like a very confusing result.
Um
and most people now think that
Neanderthals and Denisovans are like
descend from a common ancestral
population separated earlier from the
ancestors of modern humans.
So, uh I'm interested in the possibility
that actually the right way to think
about Neanderthals is actually as
somehow culturally modern humans. Uh and
uh even though that genetically they're
mostly Denisovans. And the model I'm
thinking about is motivated by this arc-
archaeological phenomenon known as the
Middle Stone Age Revolution. So, if this
is Africa
and this is I don't know, Europe. Uh
We know that the uh new way of making
stone tools uh with these cores that
were uh very carefully uh mined far away
from the locations they were used, made
out of high-quality stone like flint,
start being used 3 or 400,000 years ago
first in the Caucasus, places like
Georgia today or East Africa. And that
[snorts] this way of making stone tools,
which is quite revolutionary and is
known in Europe as the Middle
Paleolithic in Africa as the Middle
Stone Age, and is associated with much
more widespread use of fire uh and also
moving stone and around at much further
distances than before.
I'm [snorts] interested in the idea that
this is something that's shared between
African between modern humans and
Neanderthals is somehow some shared
cultural feature that's absent in East
Asia. And that might have a relationship
in the genetic data and is somehow
related to this 5% DNA. So, the idea I'm
interested in is the possibility that
there is a population here that invents
the Middle Stone Age, the Middle
Paleolithic, sometimes called Levelois
technology, and that people from this
population expand into Europe, and they
mix with the local archaic humans who
are there. And that is what this 5%
interbreeding event is. It happens 2 to
300,000 years ago, and it produces a
group that as it expands across this
landscape in Europe, mostly picks up the
local DNA and becomes mostly archaic
genetically, but retains its modern
human culture, the way of making stone
tools and some of its traditions. And
so, one of the things that's super
interesting about this is that if you
actually look at the genetics, the whole
genome, the Neanderthals and Denisovans
cluster. But if you look at the
mitochondrial DNA, which people get from
their moms and they get from their moms,
Neanderthals and modern humans cluster.
So, if you look at the mitochondrial
DNA, Denisovans and modern humans share
an ancestor well more than 700 or
800,000 years, as you expect for this
history. And if you look at the Y
chromosome that you get from your dad,
Denisovans and modern humans share
ancestor more than 7 or 800,000 years
ago, which is consistent with this
history. But if you look at the
Neanderthal mitochondrial DNA, it's only
3 to 450,000 years. If you look at the Y
chromosome, it's only 3 to 450,000
years. So, what the current genetic work
is asking us to believe is that even
though this is only 5% of the whole
genome, it introduces mitochondrial DNA
and Y chromosomes, and they jump up to
100% frequency. It's kind of a crazy
claim because the probability of this
occurring by chance is low, maybe 5% *
5%, so a very small number. And so, it's
sort of what we actually all believe,
but it's sort of a very sort of
surprising event and somehow it's
accreted all the findings in the whole
literature so that we make ourselves
believe this, but it seems sort of
unlikely on first principles that
somehow only 5% will introduce both the
Y chromosome and mitochondrial DNA. And
it really looks like this. So, there's
this amazing data from this site in
Spain that's like 2 to 400,000 years
old. It's 3 to 400,000 years old at site
called Sima de los Huesos. And they have
a nuclear genome that looks
Neanderthal-like, most of the genome,
but their mitochondrial DNA and Y
chromosome was Denisovan-like. So, it
really looks like there was a population
related to modern humans that pushed
into this Sima de los Huesos-like
population, displaced its mitochondrial
DNA and Y chromosome, but kept the rest
of its genome. So, it really looked like
something like this happened. So, the
idea that I'm sort of playing with and,
you know, probably is wrong, who knows,
but is that there's a landscape
this is maybe Europe and
you can break it up into 100 or so
deems, little areas, and modern humans
get introduced at the bottom right
corner in the Middle East or something,
and they spread into Europe, and as this
population spreads, there's a wave front
of expansion and they're interacting
with the local archaic humans. And even
if there's a small amount of
interbreeding, the theory
from lots of studies simulations and
lots of studies of all these different
species like mammals and birds and so on
shows that there is
when there's even a little amount of
interbreeding as there's an invasion or
a movement of expansion of one group
into the territory occupied by the
other, there's massive introgression of
local genes. There's uh
the the that
that these pioneers at the wave front,
they'll sometimes interbreed with a
local population. There's so many of
them around that their DNA will get
swamped by the local group. So, by the
time they make it to the other side,
they're largely local.
And
so, maybe what we're seeing is that this
is what's happened. You have like a
modern human population that's
matrilineal, for example, where
transmission of making stone tools this
way is happening from your mother to the
kid. And
that's why they're retaining their
mitochondrial DNA, but by the time they
get to the other end of Europe, they're
mostly archaic. They're mostly local
archaic. So you end up with a 95%
population replacement. So this would
explain why the mitochondrial DNA is
shared between the Neanderthals and
modern humans, and it would also explain
why the mixture proportion is only 5%,
but like the really interesting thing is
that actually there's other evidence
from studies of modern humans that
actually modern humans are too also
admixed, and that the right way to think
about this
is that modern humans are a mixture
of two groups maybe like 1.5 million
years ago,
and that they come together 2 to 300,000
years ago
with like 20%
200 to 300,000 years ago
with maybe 20%
ancestry from this archaic
African group and 80% ancestry from this
early modern lineage, and that the same
group then mixes with
with Neanderthals and it's 5% modern
here and 95% local here. And so you
actually have this key population that
makes the Middle Stone Age.
Or level what technology, this one that
appears here.
And it expands in all directions into
Europe here, into Africa here, 2 to
300,000 years ago bringing this
technology, bringing these new ideas,
bringing perhaps some genetic
adaptations. It expands into archaic
humans in Europe, it mixes with the
local population, it gets 95% replaced,
but still retains its cultural
features and maybe some genetic
features. And it expands in Africa, too,
and here it's not 95% replaced, it's
only 20% replaced. And probably the
reason that happens is that this group
is much, much more diverged, it's much
more archaic, it's 1.5 million years
diverged rather than 7 to 800,000 years
diverged. And as a result, there's many
more incompatibilities genetically, and
there's much more barriers to gene flow,
but there's still a lot, maybe 20%, and
we have evidence that this is a big
mixture that happens. And so, what
you're actually seeing is a modern human
expansion both into Europe and into
Africa. In one place is it forms
Neanderthals, in one place is it forms
the ancestors of everybody living today,
but all of these groups are descended
from this key, sort of revolutionary
event that happens here. So, we often
talk about the revolutionary events 50
to 100,000 years ago, the more symbolic
behavior, and so on and so forth, uh
that sort of first appear in Africa and
the Middle East and spread beyond. But
there's also this earlier event, and
this event is sort of contemporaneous
with the breakup of all the different
groups also in Africa today, uh you
know, the Khoisan Southern Africans and
the Central African rainforest
hunter-gatherers. So, one wonders
whether this is an equally important
formative event, and it also, if that's
true, makes you think of Neanderthals as
actually somehow our cousins, that
they're actually share our Y chromosome,
they're share our mitochondrial DNA,
they're share formation of this 2 or
300,000 year-old event, their shared
toolkit. So, even though the genome is
telling us that they're cousins of
Neanderthal Denisovans, the
the actual correct way to think about
them may be in an important sense
somehow
the uh
you know, relations or the close cousins
of modern humans.
>> I I have so many questions. Do you have
15 more minutes? Okay. Um first of all,
what is going on with this
group of archaic Africans 1.5 million
years ago? Where in Africa are they? And
what happens to the portion of them that
don't form modern humans? Do they
survive?
>> So, they
the genetic data suggests this is
analysis not of any ancient DNA, but
only an analysis of modern DNA from
different people, mostly in Africa, but
also non-Africans. And multiple studies,
there's at least three, maybe four or
five studies that I've I know about,
have looked at the patterns of variation
in people today and say the data in
modern people today, including in
Africans, is not consistent with a
homogeneous population. It looks like a
population that split well more than a
million years ago into multiple, at
least two, but maybe many groups, and
then came together with an important
coming together a few hundred thousand
years ago. The papers have different
models that they fit, but they all have
this feature of more than a million
years ago there's a split up, and then
on the order of a few hundred thousand
years ago there's a coming together and
a re-mix through event forming the
ancestors of anatomically modern humans.
>> And then this includes the Khoisan and
whatever other groups. Okay, great.
>> All of these groups have this. Maybe
it's in slightly different proportions.
So, you ask, "Where are these people
living?" Who knows, right? Like, you
know, in this scenario, the 80% is
coming from
the Caucasus or Northeast Africa, where
this Middle Stone Age formed. It's from
this population that forms the Middle
Stone Age. And then they mix with like
local groups, and who knows where they
are, Southern Africa, Western Africa,
Central Africa, Eastern Africa. We don't
have any ancient DNA. But like, you
know, this is a very rich environment.
People have been living there for like 7
million years at least, and like there
would have been different groups of
people everywhere. Probably it's not
just two groups, it's probably more
groups. I think the important theme here
is there's evidence of substructure
that's well more than a million years
ago, and this place would have been a
landscape full of archaic humans that
would have been differently, you know,
related to these expanding people and
would and would have admixed with them
when they came through.
>> Okay, so the Neanderthals first came
around 300,000 years ago.
Our ancestors share culture with them.
They share the Middle Eastern Asia
technology, but they don't replace the
population. The technology spreads
through culture, basically.
Um
>> Well, it spreads through genes, too. If
you look at Yamnaya in India,
there's almost no Yamnaya ancestry in
India.
>> Huh?
>> I mean, it's just diluted, diluted,
diluted down as modern as Yamnaya
expanded into Central Asia. You know,
like it expands into Europe, it makes
the Corded Ware, there's a 25% dilution,
it expands back across Central Asia, it
goes through the Hindu Kush, you know,
it gets into northern South Asia, it
admixes more with local people. By the
time, you know, today, the most Yamnaya
ancestry you see in India is 20% or 10,
you know, most people have less than 10%
or 5%.
It's, you know, there's just been a lot
of mixture on the way, but it is the
tracer dye, right? Like it tracks into
European languages and important aspects
of Indo-European culture are coming
through Yamnaya. So, if you know where
to look, that tracer dye is only 10%,
it's only 5%, it's only 2% in some
groups, but it's the languages people
speak and it's important cultural shared
elements that connect them to people on
the other side of the Indo-European
speaking world. So, this 5% is you
shouldn't sneeze at it, right? Like
that's tracing something important in
this model.
>> And then, um I understand that if things
are transmitted more through women that
Actually, yeah, sorry, let me back up. I
don't understand why the maternal DNA
and uh
mitochondrial DNA and the Y chromosome
would be especially privileged as the
spreading is happening. Can you explain
that?
>> Um so, the reason I'm talking about
these matrilineal or patrilineal
expansions is I'm really troubled and
have been troubled for like many years,
uh actually 15 years, but like
especially in the last three or four
years, by the fact that the
mitochondrial DNA and Y chromosome
cluster Neanderthals and modern humans,
but the rest of the genome clusters
Neanderthals and Denisovans. This is
like a crazy result that is not seen in
any other species where you see this
pattern. So, I'm very interested in
patterns that would explain this. If you
invoke and assume that there was like a
matrilineal or a patrilineal expansion,
um it could be either, uh where if
modern humans when they were expanded
across the landscape of Europe, uh
retained their identity along one of the
lines. Like if you incorporate a local,
if it's if it's matrilineal, when they
incorporate a male from the local
community, they're brought into the
community and the kids are raised by
based on the culture of the mothers or
something. Or or if it's a patrilineal
expansion, they incorporate a female
from the community, it's incorporated
sort of raised with the culture of the
fathers.
Um
So, if that happens, it guarantees one
of these two parts of the genome to look
like it does because
it's a modern human expansion. If it's
patrilineal, it will retain the Y
chromosome. If it's matrilineal, it will
retain the mitochondrial DNA. So, it
will solve one of your two problems.
>> But not both.
>> It won't solve the other one, so you
need to solve the other one.
Uh so, the other one you can solve
either by natural selection or you can
solve it by social selection. So, uh
it's So, so by the way, patrilineality
and matrilineality are the rule, not the
exception in human communities. Usually
communities sort of follow con- have
continuity along the male or the female
line. Um and you usually it's
patrilineality, sometimes it's
matrilineality. Um so,
you can also have phenomena like social
selection. So, uh so, it could be that
once you have kids of someone who is
from uh the uh
whose father, for example, is from the
outside community, that those the male
Usually in most communities, uh
females all reproduce. Like that's
typical today. Like usually women have
kids if they can. But men in traditional
societies are actually very variable in
their reproductive success. A large
fraction of men never have kids. And
then there's a relatively smaller number
of There's a a subset of men have many
kids.
>> Yeah.
>> with many women.
And so, there's competition among men
for kids. So, in this context where
males are competing for access to
females, then female mate choice begins
to be an important process. And
you have a phenomenon where uh it could
be the case that it like that if you are
your dad is an archaic male, then you're
not going to be as successful in the
competition for local females as if your
dad is a non-archaic male. So, a some
simple social phenomenon like that could
explain the data. And we actually see
this in human society. So, for example,
if I remember right, like in Central
African rainforest hunter-gatherers,
there's different treatment of boys and
girls depending on whether their dad or
mom is one group or the other.
>> I guess I don't understand how the
maternal like Okay. Um
you know
the group spreads and it gets to the
next front.
>> Yeah.
>> And
uh they have kids. And some of those
kids are
um
I Okay. I I The the from the group from
the humans that have just entered, their
kids will have the maternal DNA the
mitochondrial DNA from the humans.
>> Yeah.
>> But from the existing people, they will
have the mitochondrial DNA of the
archaic humans.
>> Yeah.
>> And
why are the people with the archaic
mitochondrial DNA not surviving?
>> Um so,
uh it's a question. So, there's multiple
possible explanations, but it's much
easier to explain that than both the
mitochondrial DNA and the Y chromosome.
One possibility is that the
mitochondrial DNA was less biologically
fit. Another possibility is that there's
social discrimination on against people
based on whether their parents are
archaic or not.
>> Interesting.
>> Um which is I think not at all
surprising in a human context.
>> What Okay, so then the end result
>> weakest link in this this argument. This
argument's probably wrong, but I'm just
telling you what I'm thinking about.
>> Um Okay, the Neanderthals, so 300,000
years ago, we
um
our lineage interacts with them, but
mostly their our lineage survives, and
there's cultural diffusion, etc. Um and
genetic diffusion. And then
is it 70,000 years ago that we interact
again?
>> Yes.
>> And they don't survive.
>> The the genetic ancestry doesn't
survive.
>> ancestry doesn't survive. So, um
presumably there was also other contact
in between 300,000 years ago and 70,000
years ago.
>> Probably. Yeah.
>> But what
>> are the These are the ones we're
detecting currently.
>> Is it Is it just sort of like there's
not really an answer or just contention
to why one time there's this kind of
diffusion where most of the archaic
genome survives and the other time it's
total replacement?
>> I think that this is not at all
surprising given the context. So, like
if if you look if you think about this
model, this is 700,000 years ago. This
is 300,000 years ago, right? So, this is
like 400,000 years separated. You talked
about the Batia paper with me earlier.
That's two populations 70,000 years
separated. There's no biological
incompatibilities between West Africans
and Europeans. There's no natural
selection against biological
incompatibilities. So, we know with when
Neanderthals and modern humans met and
mixed, uh there were there were
biological incompatibilities. That was
at 700,000 years ago. Um
and so, there's as populations become
more apart, there begins to be
biological incompatibilities rapidly
developing, probably as the square of
the distance separation, because you
need pairs of interacting genes, and
therefore it's the square of the
separation. Uh So, here it would have
been maybe only 400,000 years separated
between this lineage and this lineage.
Here, it's like 1.2 million years. It's
a lot. So, these are at the edge of not
being able to produce children. So, this
is quite different humans. These are
actually three times closer than these.
>> Yeah. know, and like if you look at
mixtures of humans today, there are
mixtures in Southern Africa today or
people who are half this distance.
>> Yeah.
>> Right? Like you know, if you look at
Khoisan and Bantu people mixing in
Southern Africa, like the Xhosa, which
is the you know, the population of for
example Nelson Mandela, this is groups
that are separated by almost 200,000
years, which is half of this, totally
compatible compatible. And so
like what you're seeing is this is a
group that's actually completely
permeable genetically or nearly
completely permeable. This this one is
almost certainly has substantial
biological incompatibilities because
300,000 years later, two or 300,000
years later, we see the interbreeding
between Neanderthals and modern humans
or between Denisovans and modern humans,
there's clear evidence of
incompatibility at that point.
>> But this would be even bigger. So what
you would expect to see is that as this
group spread, they would be moving into
a territory full of archaic humans and
there would be some interbreeding, but
the kids would be not very fit, they
would die off, there would be a lot of
infertility. And so the barriers to gene
flow or the of of and to interbreeding
would be greater. So to me it's not at
all surprising that as this group moves
into Eurasia, here's Eurasian archaics,
you know, the ancestors of Denisovans.
You know, and these are only 400,000
years diverged from these people over
here. And here's African archaics.
And these are like 1.2 million years
diverge. So you know, they just don't
interbreed as much. And so you don't get
as much much much much inflow. But the
key thing is the same time. It's the
same time. So like it really feels like
the signature of an explosion of people
from one place interacting with people
here, interacting with people here. It's
the same sort of
sort of cultural revolution or
technological revolution impacting this
place, impacting this place,
and creating populations that are kind
of both impacted by this cultural
revolution, which we know is the case
because they share the same toolkit. Um
and so you know, some people argue that
Level II technology is independently
invented, but this would be a sort of
but, you know, it's very similar. And
this would be a way that it would have
the same origin.
>> Interesting.
>> Um, and sort of so, there's a cultural
shared thread, this shared toolkit.
There's a mitochondrial DNA and Y
chromosome thread, which is and then
there is a
a timing sort of shared thread, which is
they both formed by mixture.
>> Because otherwise you'd have to believe
that Neanderthals independently
developed Stone Age.
>> Yes, which is not inconceivable, but
like it's a little bit like believing
that farming independently developed in
multiple parts of the world.
>> Right. But wait, it did.
>> It did.
>> Yeah. Um,
>> So, as I said, this is probably wrong.
>> Um,
>> I'm trying to tell you that like we
don't really know the world we live in.
>> Yeah.
>> And like, you know, like this is not
obviously wrong. In fact, to me this is
much more plausible than the model we
currently like sort of write down. Like,
you know, it's probably wrong, but it
like it's just much more more plausible.
It explains many more things. It's no
more complicated.
>> Interesting. Um, do do you want to
recapitulate the thing you're saying
about the the analogy to the uh Ptolemy
and the epicycles was quite interesting.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah. I mean, you know, like I think
that, you know, the model that we've put
together collectively about the
relationships between archaic and modern
humans is sort of accreted over time.
There was this, you know, idea that
modern humans are distinct and that
Neanderthals and Denisovans are like
sisters of each other. And then over
time we developed and detected
additional mixture events like this
modern human into Neanderthal and then
this other ones I didn't even talk about
like super divergent lineage going into
Denisovans and like all this other
stuff. And we still say, "Oh, the whole
genome says Neanderthals and Denisovans
are sisters, so that's the truth."
Uh and we like patched it all together
and gotten it all to work. And oh, you
look at the mitochondrial DNA and the Y
chromosome and they have this odd
pattern and it's improbable, but we can
get that to work if we invoke natural
selection, you know, things like this.
So, so
you patch it all together, you make
these It's a little reminds one of
sort of what happened in the ancient
world where
there was this idea that the sun
revolves around the earth, but it
doesn't quite explain the movements of
the planets properly. And so, in order
to get the movements of the planets to
work right,
you know, the Ptolemaean astronomers
would have made up these
epicycles, these special like extra
rotations and movements to make
everything work about right. And it was
a such a convoluted model, and then when
Copernicus
and colleagues suggested instead that
actually what's happening is
everything's revolving around the sun,
that it simplified things and made
things ever so much simpler. So, what
the situation that was happening is that
as as sort of as
astronomical information accumulated, it
kept being contradictory to the standard
model, but it could be made to work by
proposing another complication and
another complication and another
complication. But, you know, this is not
like as like fantastic as you know,
proposing that everything revolves
around the sun rather than the earth,
but it is much simpler. And actually it
explains many, many things.
>> What what what is
counterintuitive or unexpected or hard
to accept about
this alternative model?
Like what what is the hesitation that
people have for adopting this as the
>> I don't know. I mean, nobody's thinking
about this model right now.
>> Huh.
>> So, I mean, I don't know. It's just I
think that I
I don't know. It seems like obviously a
very natural model to me.
>> Um there's an aspect of so, Aristarchus,
ancient Greek, had the heliocentric
theory
um because he had done a bunch of
observations about how far the earth or
had deduced how far the earth is from
the sun, had noticed other things, but
it was not um
adopted because his fellow Athenians
were like, "Look, if we believe
that the Earth revolves around the Sun,
for it to be the case that we don't see
relative movement of the stars to the
Earth,
the only possible explanation is that
the stars are so far away that it is
just incomprehensible and implausible."
And so, the heliocentric theory was
dismissed. And the reason what I want to
try and ask is what is the equivalent of
like, "Oh, for this to work, the stars
had to be so far away that it isn't
conceivable." Where like actually the
stars are so far away. And we should
adopt the the the implausible
implication that this theory gives us.
>> That's a great question.
Uh
I think that we have to assume that
there's a linkage between the cultural
transformations in Africa and Eurasia at
this time. And that's sort of not
something that the community has really
put together with the genetic data.
>> Mhm.
>> So, uh I think that there's this thread
in the genetics about substructure in
Africans. And then there's this whole
world based on ancient DNA, and they've
never put been put together. So, you
know, nobody's put together the
extensive now extensive work on modern
human substructure with the now
extensive work based on ancient DNA of
archaic human relationships to modern
humans. And if you put them together,
you realize they line up in terms of
their time
of substructuring. So, I think that I
don't know if that's improbable. It
seems actually parsimonious to me, but
yeah.
>> Yeah. And it also seems insignificant
that different groups of humans at this
time were um capable of adopting Stone
Age technology. That's once one group
had figured it out, the genetic
difference between different human
lineages was not so big that you could
not show people how to use Stone Age
tools.
>> I mean, it could be that actually this
was genetically driven. Right? Like, you
know, the time to we talked before about
the time to the common ancestor of human
genes. You know, there's nothing at, you
know, 100,000 years or 150,000 years.
But, there's a lot at 400 or 500,000
years. So, if if that's what happens and
you have a mutation that occurs in the
Caucasus or, you know, somewhere in the
Middle East or Northeast Africa and
there's key genetic mutations that make
people able to do this and then this
population expands, you know, it moves
into Europe, it's swamped by local
genes, but there could be retention of
those genes because through selection as
it expands. So, maybe what you're
actually seeing is that actually there
are genetic developments. Most of the
discussion on this I point has been
focused on the 50 to 100,000 year event
uh and this is like anatomically modern
human behavior. But, this is like a lot
of my archaeologists think this is an
equally if not more profoundly
significant event in many ways. And why
is that not the event that we should be
talking about?
>> Well, and then we know you're talking
about how there's no fixed differences
between modern humans and the humans
50,000 years ago.
Are there any Do we know if there's any
uh fixed differences between the people
50,000 years ago and the people 300,000
years ago other than obviously these
interbreedings?
>> I think that this is what we're talking
about, which is like if you look at the
genetic variation going back three or
400,000 years, then uh there are you do
begin to be places where all modern
humans share common ancestry three or
400,000 years ago. And that's another
way of saying there are beginning to be
fixed differences at that time, Duff. Um
so, that is where you start seeing uh
evidence for possible fixed differences.
What's basically happening if everybody
shares a common ancestor 400,000,
500,000 years ago is there's a single
ancestor at that time. And if you
compared it to another population like,
you know, these guys, they would descend
from a different lineage. So, any
mutation that occurred ancestral to that
single ancestor would be a fixed
difference.
>> Yeah.
>> So, so this is the time at which you can
begin to see fixed differences.
>> But,
anatomically modern cognitively modern
humans exist by the beginning of the
Middle Stone Age and before were
breeding with
this
ancient group of Africans or breeding
with Neanderthals.
>> Anatomically modern humans occur exactly
here. It's the same moment. This is when
they occur. The people who like have
skeletal features like ours and
Neanderthals appear exactly then. This
is when it all happens. So, like this is
when we there is this disconnect between
anatomically modern humans in the
skeletal record and between, you know,
behaviorally modern humans, which is 50
to 100,000 years ago. But anatomically
modern humans appear at this time and
actually recognizable Neanderthals
appear roughly around this time, too.
>> Interesting. Interesting. But we don't
know what exactly happens if anything
between 200,000 years ago and 50,000
years ago. That goes from just
anatomically anatomical modernity to
behavioral modernity.
>> is no. You know, there begins to be, you
know, they're busy making level one
stone tools like Neanderthals for
200,000 years
and not more impressive than
Neanderthals in any way.
>> Interesting.
>> Um and in any obvious way as I
understand. And then there begins to be
in the archaeological record a
quickening of sort of, you know,
behavioral sort of traits, you know,
which could be not genetic at all or it
could be genetic. Like, you know, there
was there's lots of arguments about
this.
But, you know, people are obsessed with,
you know, like we were obsessed with
intelligence in the earlier in our
conversation. But people are obsessed
with art and, you know, these things
that seem important to us. But like who
knows what's important. Um and
>> Yeah. Interesting. Cool. Oh,
thanks for the digression.
>> The work that I've been involved in is
consistently shown that I was wrong in
my biases coming into the work and I've
really been almost traumatized by this.
Like again and again I've come into a
project with some kind of guess about
what the data was showing and then the
data doesn't show that. So, for example,
when I got involved in the the genome
project and helping to analyze data
looking at how archaic Neanderthals were
related to modern humans, I was part of
a group of scientists who had
established that non-Africans were a
simple subset of African variation and
that there was no evidence at all of
Neanderthal interbreeding into the
ancestors of modern humans or other
archaic interbreeding. Different
analyses that I and and very much more
other people had done made it look like
non-Africans variation was just a
subset, a small sample of that in Africa
and that could have fully explained the
data. And so that when I was involved in
analyzing the Neanderthal DNA sequences,
what happened was I found this very
strong evidence of Neanderthals being
more closely related to non-Africans
than to Africans and it was very
surprising and I thought it must be a
mistake. I thought it was I was quite
incredulous. I thought it was unlikely
to be true because other evidence that
had been
that had been found before seemed to
point in the other direction and so I
spent several years trying to make these
results go away as did my colleagues and
we just couldn't make the results go
away. They just kept getting stronger
and this experience working on natural
selection was the same. So what we had
felt here was that what we were
convinced of was that natural selection
had been pretty quiescent in our species
over the last several hundred thousand
years. Therefore, if we look at patterns
of variation
in non-African people today or in any
people today, we should see not a lot of
selection going on. And indeed, the
first ancient DNA studies beginning in
2015 with this paper that we were
involved in with Ian Mathieson and
colleagues,
indeed, these papers seem to show
relatively small numbers of genetic
positions associated with natural
selection. So in 2015, we analyzed data
from about 200 Europeans and Middle
Easterners to try to understand
frequency changes over time.
And we compared those ancient people who
were the sources of modern Europeans to
people in Europe today, and we looked at
frequency differences that were too
extreme to be due to chance. We were
very excited to find 12 positions that
we were convinced were highly different
in frequency between Europeans today and
what we would expect based on the
history that that that we had we and
others had identified was the history
relating modern to ancient Europeans.
And so some of these were known, and
some of these were not known, and this
was very exciting. And we hoped that as
the numbers of samples would increase
and we would get higher resolution to be
able to appreciate differences in
frequencies over time, we hoped that
this would make it possible to detect
far more. And what was quite
disappointing over the subsequent decade
is that that didn't happen. So for
example, the largest study of that type
in 2024 by a group in Copenhagen
analyzed the data, much better data than
we had in 2015, and found only 21
positions that were highly different in
frequency across time. And while that
was exciting, it was almost twice as
many as we had found in 2015, in a lot
of ways it was disappointing cuz the
sample size and data quality had gone up
so much, and yet this is all that was
found. And so what that suggested is
that we might be hitting an asymptote,
and we might not be able to get beyond
where we currently were, and that this
approach to learning about biology,
which would be
was very promising in theory, might
actually not produce a high yield. That
maybe in fact, natural was quiescent,
and in fact, what the reason we're
seeing so few changes is that actually
there's not been a lot of adaptive
directional selection. So that was the
situation we found ourselves in until
just a a few years ago when we carried
out this study in our research group led
by Ali Akbar.
So so what we did is we deployed a few
innovations or change to try to improve
our power to detect uh, natural
selection. One of them is we just pumped
a lot of data into the system and so we
increased the amount of data by about
14-fold and the main thing that we do in
this study is we report data in this
study from about 10,000 individuals, uh,
with new data. So this is like a very
big increase in the amount of data in
the literature and uh, the total data
set size of ancient individuals
distributed over the last 18,000 years
is about 16,000 people. So this is a
large data set, it's much larger than
was previously possible. And when you
have more data, you can estimate
frequency changes with much more
subtlety. And the data comes from only
one part of the world, uh, which is
Europe and the Middle East. Uh, it's not
a more important part of the world than
other places, but it's the place where
maybe 70 or 80% of the data in the
ancient DNA literature so far comes from
due to historical reasons. And it
provides us with a natural laboratory
where we can see what happens over one
place over time as environments change
to the genome. It's really interesting
to imagine doing this type of analysis
in other parts of the world and the
comparative analyses are super important
and interesting, but this study right
now is about this one place in the world
where we have particularly fantastic
data.
The other thing we did is we developed
an entirely new methodology that hadn't
been used in this area before. And the
methodology is based on a technique that
had been developed for finding risk
factors for disease, um, in, uh,
in in medical studies. Uh, and uh, a
simple way to explain it is we ask how
to predict the genetic type a person has
based on its pattern of relatedness to
other people. So we'll have a data set
of about 16,000 ancient people and
22,000 people if we include the ancient
and modern people.
And then we look at how closely related
each of these 22,000 people are to each
other.
And we predict the genetic type at each
position in the DNA at 10 million
positions based on the pattern of
relatedness to all of the other 22,000
people.
And then we ask if if natural selection
blowing the frequency of the mutation in
the same direction in all the geographic
places and at all times predicts the
data a little bit better than just
knowing the relatedness to all the other
samples in the database. So we're simply
asking
the alternative hypothesis is that
selection has been blowing in the same
direction at all times and we simply ask
if that explains the data better.
And that's [snorts] a a dumb assumption
because of course the truth is that
natural selection is going to have
changed in frequency over time, but
we're just asking the simplest of
questions whether assuming a constant
rate of selection explains the data more
than not doing so.
>> And just just summarize to make sure
I've understood. You're trying to make a
model that predicts allele frequency
changes over time.
>> Right.
>> And you have two different parts.
>> One part is this
uh
genetic related
relatedness matrix which captures um how
similar different genomes are to each
other and that should capture
um the impact of different bottlenecks
and of drift and of population
admixtures and all those things which
affect the entire genome.
>> Correct.
>> And uh
then you have the separate thing which
is like okay, if we look at specific
locations
can we just say that oh this location
has been selected at whatever
coefficient over time um and if we add
some coefficient it does it become
easier to predict the allele frequency
changes than you would have just seen
from this other artifact which is only
predict which is just looking at like oh
if you look at the whole genome, are
these guys in the same you know, are
they going through the same bottlenecks,
have they gone through the same drift,
etc.
>> That's precisely right.
>> Okay. Um okay, so what have we learned?
>> So
uh when we analyze the data this way, we
looked at 10 million positions in the
DNA
that
in in these 22,000 people, 16,000 of
them were ancient and we looked to see
if there was more change in this
consistent direction over time than you
would expect by chance. And when we
analyze the data, we found many, many
hundreds of places in the DNA that were
changing too much over time in too
consistent a way to be explained by
chance. Now, there's a bit of a
statistical problem in figuring out how
many there are because they're so
densely packed that they're close to
each other and they're interfering with
each other. But, when you try to piece
them out and say, "Let's look at let's
count them only one in each place in the
DNA and block blank out the others." We
find at least about 479
positions that are all independently
pushing in the same way.
Uh, those positions are 99% confident
that they're real. By another criteria
of more than 50% confident that they're
real, we think that about 3,800
positions are all pushing in the same
direction. So, this is like a crazy
number of results given that in our work
previously and other people's work,
there were at most a couple of dozen
discoveries coming from a single scan.
So, when we got this result, we were
very surprised. We were thought it must
be wrong and we spent the next couple of
years trying to make the results go
away, but they just got kept getting
stronger. And so, what we were trying to
do is to look for some kind of
independent type of evidence to tell us
whether these positions were real. And
we stumbled on something really powerful
for this purpose that had not been used
in this way before and it relied on the
fact that we had very large numbers of
discoveries, like many hundreds of
discoveries or even thousands.
And so, what we did is we took a
completely independent data set, which
was the corpus of genome-wide
association studies. So, these are
studies that people have carried out in
hundreds of thousands of people looking
for whether particular genetic mutations
are more common in people with high
blood pressure with than with low blood
blood pressure or something like this.
So, we took the UK Biobank, which is
about 500,000 people
from Great Britain who have been
measured for hundreds and hundreds of
traits. The whole genomes of all these
people have been sequenced and for each
of these traits, we could look whether
each of these 10 million positions are
connected to this trait in some way in a
convincing way. So, in 10 million
positions, about 15% about 1.5 million
positions in the DNA are predictive of
at least one of these several hundred
traits. So, then we could ask a
question, is our natural selection
signal, our statistic, is it related to
whether a mutation causes high blood
pressure or some other trait? So, we
slid our statistic for natural selection
from upward, you know, to a value of
one, a value of two, a value of three, a
value of four, a value of five. And as
we did that, the enrichment for genetic
mutations that affect traits got higher
and higher. So, whereas it was only 15%
when we didn't use our selection
statistic, when we
required the selection statistic to be
above about five,
there was about a fivefold enrichment
for mutations that cause traits. So,
sorry, what is the selection statistic?
This is the statistic we use to measure
whether a mutation is changing over time
significantly
in a non-zero way. So, it's it can be
approximately thought of as a normally
distributed statistic, a Gaussian
statistic,
which is the number of standard
deviations the statistical value is away
from zero, where zero is the is no
natural selection. It's not exactly
that, but it's close to that. And so, if
this statistic is above five, we see
about a fivefold enrichment
in mutations that affect a trait. And
so, instead of 15% of the mutations that
are
random affecting the trait, it's like 60
or 70 that are
are are affecting the trait when we
slide our statistic upward. And this is
providing completely independent
evidence that these sites are real. And
as you slide above five, there's no more
enrichment. So, our interpretation of
these results and that we were able to
validate and show that these
interpretations made sense using
computer simulations of our process. Our
interpretation of this result is that
once you slide the statistic above five,
essentially all the signals of natural
selection are real.
>> Um, okay, and so just to make sure I
understood, you're saying, "Look, in
order to figure out what alleles are
been under selection, your model
uh
assigns a statistic saying, 'Oh, in
order to explain why this allele has a
statistic frequency, we're going to give
it a selection statistic.'" Um, and
independently, you know, we run these
studies on modern populations where we
say, "If you look at height or eye
color, intelligence, whatever trait,
what are the parts of the genome that
are correlated with that trait?" And the
higher statistic you give it uh in your
study in order to explain allele
frequency changes over time as a result
of selection, the more probable it is
that that region in the genome
is associated with traits
uh that have like some functional thing
that we can measure.
>> That's exactly right. And this is like
[clears throat] a brilliant idea that
Ali had, and it's it's it really
abandons the traditional approach of
assigning statistical significance to
mutations that cause uh a trait because
we're just using an external piece of
information, the the correlation to
traits uh measured in completely
different way to read off the
probability mutations are real. So, we
can ask how much enrichment for real
signal is there given a particular
selection statistic, and if it's halfway
enriched to the plateau, the correct
interpretation of that we're able to
show is that 50% of the mutations are
are are really selected. If it's
three-quarters of the way toward the
plateau, there's a three-quarters
probability that the mutation is real.
If there's a 99% of the way to the
plateau, there's a 99% probability
that's real. So, that gives us a
calibrated estimate of the probability
that a particular position is really
under natural selection. A major concern
here is that actually what we're seeing
is not that these mutations are really
under selection, but rather that both
association to a disease and our
selection signal are due to some third
thing that's causing both of them, which
is type of selection, which is not what
we're after, not selection to adapt to
new environments, but what's called
background selection, selection against
newly arising mutations that are removed
from the population that tend to be
concentrated in genes. Genes are also
the parts of the genome that tend to be
associated to traits. And so this common
process is causing both the enrichment
for trait signals and is also causing
the enrichment for selection signals
that we're observing. That's the
concern. We were super concerned about
this. So what we did is we repeated this
enrichment analysis in slices of the DNA
that all were affected to the same
extent by background selection, by this
rain of slightly bad mutations, and we
get exactly the same pattern. We also
repeated this experiment in just using
mutations of the same frequencies uh uh
because there's different statistical
power to detect these signals at
different frequencies, and we see the
same pattern where above a value of the
selection statistic of around five we
get this plateau.
>> So the thing that changed allowed you to
increase the amount of uh sequences
you're generating by two orders of
magnitude is just the statistical method
you're using to identify which part is
human or what exactly changed in 2014
and since then?
>> So there's been a whole series of
improvements. Um I think that the uh the
the the big ones have been the huge drop
in sequencing cost, which made it
possible to generate ancient DNA in the
first place. So the drop in cost has
been a millionfold uh since the late
2000s. Uh and another maybe one to two
orders of magnitude from 2010 to today.
>> Mhm.
>> Um so that's one big change. Uh, another
change has been in solution enrichment.
So, it's been this way of taking a
sample that has very small percentages
of human DNA, but then suddenly creating
a a process that will mean that the
great majority of the sequences that
one's analyzing will be useful for
analyses. And so, the approach that we
used was we took the DNA samples that we
had, most of which were very low
percentages of human DNA, less than 10%,
often less than 1%, which is such
proportion that it's prohibitively
expensive to sequence them and to just
brute force sequencing them given the
technology that we had available at the
time.
And so, we took these uh samples and
washed them over a artificially
synthesized set of short DNA fragments
that targeted positions of the DNA that
we were interested in analyzing. So,
this is more than a million positions
that are highly variable in people, and
we picked many of these to be
biologically interesting. We had a whole
set of known biological targets that
affected traits in genome-wide
association studies, which is the way
that people look to see if there's
particular genetic variants in modern
people that cause that have particular
impacts in phenotypes and traits.
And so, what we did is we uh had this
artificially synthesized set of uh
DNA fragments that we washed our ancient
sample over, and it bound the parts of
the DNA that we targeted, and the
resulting sequence that we generated was
very enriched for the parts of the
genome that were informative about
history. And even though only 10% or 1%
of the DNA was human, it ended up that a
very large fraction was from the parts
of the genome that we were interested
in,
and it became economically efficient to
do
>> And so, what was the other 99% of the
DNA?
>> It's mostly microbial. So, it's from
bacteria and fungi that uh colonize uh a
person's body after they die. Uh,
depending on how they die, there'll be
more or less of these bacteria and
fungi. And so when you typically
sequence DNA from a person, they'll just
it'll just be full of microbial
sequence.
Sometimes the microbial sequence is very
interesting. So it might be a pathogen
that that that that a person died of. So
there's for example
amazing amazing work about for different
plagues, malaria, and black death, and
hepatitis B, and so on that have been
obtained from the sequences of these
pathogens in people's teeth and other
parts of their body when they died.
But we're focusing here on the human
DNA. And
so what we did is we this changed the
amount of data that was possible to
produce from tens per year to hundreds
per year. And then we further
roboticized and industrialized the
process so that there were many hundreds
or even thousands per year. And so just
in our laboratory, we've been generating
genome scale data from more than 5,000
individuals per year. I know this is
true also of several other laboratories
in the world now.
And this huge jump in data, this sort of
semi-exponential or even
super-exponential jump in some cases,
has made it possible to ask and answer
questions. So while the we're they were
only on the order of 10 genome sequences
from humans in 2010, there this year it
has passed more than 20,000 reported
sequences. So there's several orders of
magnitude increase. And the questions we
were able to ask in 2014 are just not
the same as the ones we can ask today.
>> Yeah. Awesome. Excellent. David, thanks
for your time.
>> Thank you. Thank you, Durecast.